Supreme Court of India
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Author: Sanjay Kishan Kaul
Bench: Sanjay Kishan Kaul, Abhay S. Oka, J.B. Pardiwala
                                                                              REPORTABLE
                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.172 OF 2023
                         AJAY KUMAR RADHEYSHYAM GOENKA                         …APPELLAN
                                                          Versus
                         TOURISM FINANCE CORPORATION
                         OF INDIA LTD.               …RESPONDENT
                         With
                         Crl. A. No.170/2023
                         Crl.A. No.171/2023
                                                   JUDGMENT
SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
Factual Background:
1. M/s Rainbow Papers Limited (company incorporated and registered under the Companies Act,
1956), of which Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka, the Appellant before us, was the Promoter and
Managing Director, Signature Not Verified Digitally signed by ASHA SUNDRIYAL sought loans
from a public financial institution, Tourism Finance Date: 2023.03.15 18:53:29 IST Reason:
Corporation of India Limited, the Respondent before us, to fulfil its various corporate requirements.
The proposal of the company was considered by the Respondent and approval was granted for a
Term Loan of Rs. 30.00 crores.
In pursuance to the approval, a Loan Agreement was executed on 27.03.2012 in New Delhi.
2. In order to satisfy its obligations under the Agreement, the Accused company issued post-dated
cheque of Rs. 25,47,945/- bearing cheque number 090656 dated 15.02.2016, drawn on Indian
Overseas Bank, Kalupur Circle Branch, Railway Pura, Ahmedabad, towards the payment of one of
the instalments. On the cheque being presented to the bankers of the Respondent i.e., HDFC Bank
Limited, Nehru Place Branch, New Delhi, the cheque was returned vide Memo dated 07.04.2016 for
the reason “Account Closed”.
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
1
3. On 19.04.2016, a demand-cum-legal notice under Section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act,
1881, (hereinafter referred to as ‘the NI Act’) was issued on behalf of the Respondent calling upon
the company as Accused no.1 and the Appellant herein as Accused no. 2 to settle the debt advanced
by way of corporate loan dated 27.03.2012. The Accused acknowledged their liability to pay the loan
amount vide reply dated 28.04.2016. The amount was not paid and, thus, on 16.05.2016, Criminal
Complaint No. 632982/2016 was filed in the Court of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Saket Courts,
New Delhi, under Section 190 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, read with Section 138 1,
Section 1412 and Section 1423 of the NI Act. The complaint was signed and verified by Mr. N.
Ramachandran, Deputy General Manager (Law) of the Respondent company. An endeavor for
mediation was made but was not successful and, thus, the next date was scheduled before the
Magistrate for 15.01.2018. In the meantime, a development, which took place, was that in 2017 M/s
Neeraj Paper Agencies Limited, styling itself as ‘Operational Creditor’, filed an application under
Section 9 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as ‘IBC’) read with
Rule 6 of Insolvency and Bankruptcy (Application to Adjudicating Authority) Rules, 2016,
(hereinafter referred to as ‘IB Rules, 2016’) with the request to initiate Corporate Insolvency
Resolution Process against the Accused company, treating it as the 'Corporate Debtor'. The National
Company Law Tribunal vide order dated 12.09.2017 admitted the aforesaid insolvency application.
4. The Respondent herein filed its claim qua the debt, which was the subject matter of the N.I. Act
proceedings, on 13.10.2017. In terms of the Resolution Plan dated 26.05.2018, the Resolution
Applicant (Kushal Limited) filed the Resolution Plan and during the course of meeting the
Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc., of funds in the account.
Offences by companies.
Cognizance of offences.
Committee of Creditors on 05.06.2018, it was informed that the respondent herein could not be
considered as a Secured Financial Creditor as per definitions contained in Section 3(30) and Section
3(31) of the IBC. In effect, on legal advice, the Respondent was opined as an Unsecured Financial
Creditor. This resulted in the Respondent filing applications, in the form of objections, before the
NCLAT where the status was sought to be changed from the Unsecured to Secured Financial
Creditor.
5. Now turning back to the NIA proceedings, the Metropolitan Magistrate passed an interim order
dated 12.11.2018 dismissing the application of the Appellant for exemption from personal
appearance. This, in turn, was predicated on the observations of NCLAT in Shah Brothers Ispat Pvt.
Ltd. Vs P. Mohan Raj &Ors, Company Appeal (AT) Insolvency No.306 of 2018, opining that Section
138 of NI Act is a penal provision, which empowers the court of competent jurisdiction to pass order
of imprisonment or fine, which cannot be held to be proceedings or any judgment or decree of
money claim. Thus, it would not come within the purview of Section 14 of the IBC and, thus, the
proceedings under Section 138 of the NI Act, 1881 could continue simultaneously.
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
2
6. The Appellant, thus, filed an application for discharge of the Complaint Case in question herein in
the present case, which was dismissed by the Metropolitan Magistrate vide order dated 01.11.2019.
The Criminal Revision Petition preferred by the Appellant bearing Criminal Revision Petition No.
784 of 2019 also met with a similar fate before the High Court and was dismissed with cost of Rs.
20,000/- to be paid by the Appellant to the Respondent. It is this order, which is now, sought to be
assailed before us.
Appellant’s submissions:
7. Mr. Nikhil Goel, learned counsel, sought to urge on behalf of the appellant that the trigger of
Section 138 of the NI Act, is the non-payment of legally enforceable debt. Once the debt is itself
extinguished, either under Section 31 or in process from Sections 38 to 41 and 54 of IBC, the basis of
Section 138 of the NI Act disappears. We may note that these provisions fall under Chapter III4 of
the IBC.
8. The term ‘Debt’ would mean ‘legally enforceable debt’ under the Explanation to Section 138 of the
NI Act and this may be read with Sections 2(6) and 2(8) of the IBC.
9. It was submitted that the nature of the proceedings under Section 138 of the NI Act is primarily
compensatory in nature and the punitive element is incorporated at enforcing the compensatory
provisions. Therefore, once Liquidation Process recovery is made partly by the receipt of money and
partly by waiver, Section 138 of the NI Act should not be permitted to be continued.
10. It was lastly urged that if the debt of the company is resolved then the payment would be
governed under the Resolution Plan. If the debts are not resolved, then the assets of the company
are to be distributed in terms of Section 53 of the IBC.
Plea of the Respondent:
11. On behalf of the Respondent, it was urged that the cheque was given for repayment of the
aforementioned loan amount of Rs.30 crore for which the accused company agreed to repay the
principal amount in two installments with first installment of Rs.10 crore payable on 31.03.2015 and
the second installment of Rs.20 crore payable on 31.03.2016. The accused company had to pay
interest @ 15 per cent per annum on the said principal amount of loan and such interest was payable
monthly on the 15th day of every month, which was in consonance with the dates and the cheque
amount.
12. It was urged that the accused company along with the Appellant deliberately and with the mala
fide intention gave the cheque to defraud the Respondent to take loan from it and subsequently to
usurp the loan amount and hence had closed the bank account. The Appellant being the signatory
was directly liable along with the accused company. The Appellant was actively involved in the day
to day affairs of the company as can be inferred from the aforementioned loan agreement signed by
him as well.
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
3
Our View:
13. We may note that on 20.09.2022 with some of the SLPs being withdrawn, in respect of the SLPs
in question, the interim order was made absolute with the direction for urgent listing as criminal
proceedings had been stayed. Learned counsel for the parties stated that they will file short synopsis
not running into more than three pages each and will not take more than 15-20 minutes each for
their respective submissions. On the conspectus of the aforesaid we heard the arguments on
17.01.2023 when we granted leave and reserved the judgment.
14. The Appellant had submitted the synopsis in advance. The Respondent however, despite
assuring that they would submit the synopsis has not cared to do so and we have gone on the basis
of the record. This position is prevalent right till 12.03.2023 and we do not consider it appropriate to
wait any more. We assume that the Respondent is not interested in rendering any further assistance
to the Court by filing synopsis. Fortunately for them, for the reasons to be recorded hereinafter, they
have not really suffered the consequences thereof.
15. The issue whether the respondent is a Secured Financial Creditor or an Unsecured Financial
Creditor within the meaning of the said Code is not something we can deal with as that is the matter
of the proceedings under the said Code or any appeal preferred therefrom. The only issue with
which we are concerned with is whether during the pendency of the proceedings under the said
Code which have been admitted, the present proceedings under the N.I. Act can continue
simultaneously or not.
16. We have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the scope of nature of proceedings under
the two Acts and quite different and would not intercede each other. In fact, a bare reading of
Section 14 of the IBC would make it clear that the nature of proceedings which have to be kept in
abeyance do not include criminal proceedings, which is the nature of proceedings under Section 138
of the N.I. Act. We are unable to appreciate the plea of the learned counsel for the Appellant that
because Section 138 of the N.I. Act proceedings arise from a default in financial debt, the
proceedings under Section 138 should be taken as akin to civil proceedings rather than criminal
proceedings. We cannot lose sight of the fact that Section 138 of the N.I. Act are not recovery
proceedings. They are penal in character. A person may face imprisonment or fine or both under
Section 138 of the N.I. Act. It is not a recovery of the amount with interest as a debt recovery
proceedings would be. They are not akin to suit proceedings.
17. It cannot be said that the process under the IBC whether under Section 31 or Sections 38 to 41
which can extinguish the debt would ipso facto apply to the extinguishment of the criminal
proceedings. No doubt in terms of the Scheme under the IBC there are sacrifices to be made by
parties to settle the debts, the company being liquidated or revitalized.
The Appellant before us has been roped in as a signatory of the cheque as well as the Promoter and
Managing Director of the Accused company, which availed of the loan. The loan agreement was also
signed by him on behalf of the company. What the Appellant seeks is escape out of criminal liability
having defaulted in payment of the amount at a very early stage of the loan. In fact, the loan account
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
4
itself was closed. So much for the bona fides of the Appellant.
18. We are unable to accept the plea that if proceedings against the company come to an end then
the Appellant as the Managing Director cannot be proceeded against. We are unable to accept the
plea that Section 138 of the N.I. Act proceedings are primarily compensatory in nature and that the
punitive element is incorporated only at enforcing the compensatory proceedings. The criminal
liability and the fines are built on the principle of not honouring a negotiable instrument, which
affects trade. This is apart from the principle of financial liability per se. To say that under a scheme
which may be approved, a part amount will be recovered or if there is no scheme a person may stand
in a queue to recover debt would absolve the consequences under Section 138 of the N.I. Act, is
unacceptable.
19. We are, thus, conclusively of the view that the impugned order takes the correct view in law and
cannot be assailed before us.
Conclusion:
20. The appeals are accordingly dismissed but without costs before us on account of what we have
recorded in para 14.
...................……………………J.
[Sanjay Kishan Kaul] ...................……………………J.
[Abhay S. Oka] New Delhi.
March 15, 2023.
REPORTABLE IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 170 OF 2023 (@SLP(CRL) NO. 417 OF 2020) AJAY KUMAR
RADHESHYAM GOENKA ……APPELLANT(S) VERSUS TOURISM FINANCE CORPORATION OF
......RESPONDENT(S) INDIA LTD.
WITH CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 172 OF 2023 (@SLP(CRL) NO. 482 OF 2020) & CRIMINAL
APPEAL NO. 171 OF 2023 (@SLP (CRL) 446 OF 2020) JUDGMENT J.B. PARDIWALA, J. :
1. I have carefully, gone through the perspicuous opinion of my esteemed brother Sanjay Kishan
Kaul, J. I am entirely in agreement with the discussion contained in the said judgment on all the
cardinal issues that have arisen for consideration in these proceedings. At the same time, having
regard to the fact that the issues involved are of seminal importance, I am also inclined to pen down
my thoughts.
2. For the sake of convenience, the Criminal Appeal No. 170 of 2023 (@ SLP (Crl) No. 417 of 2020)
is treated as the lead matter.
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
5
3. This appeal by special leave is at the instance of the original accused No. 2 in a complaint lodged
by the respondent herein (original complainant) for the offence punishable under Section 138 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (for short, ‘the NI Act’) and is directed against the order passed by
the Additional Sessions Judge-02 South East District, Saket Court, New Delhi dated 23.11.2019 in
the Criminal Revision Application No. 593 of 2019 by which the Additional Sessions Judge affirmed
the order passed by the Metropolitan Magistrate – 09, SED dated 01.11.2019 rejecting the
application filed by the appellant herein seeking discharge from the criminal proceedings i.e.
Complaint Case No. 632984 of 2016 instituted by the respondent-complainant under Section 138 of
the NI Act.
4. It is necessary to clarify why the appellant challenged the impugned order passed by the
Additional Sessions Judge directly before this Court invoking Article 136 of the Constitution of
India. In this regard, the following averments made in the synopsis are reproduced hereinbelow:
“The petitioner is directly approaching this Hon’ble Court, because the first two
facets are already being considered by this Hon’ble Court, in which view, the Hon’ble
High Court is not likely to entertain a quashing petition. This apart, a petition before
any other court is likely to result in conflicting orders and would be an exercise in
futility. The earlier matters pending before this Hon’ble Court also arose directly out
of the summons issued by the concerned Learned Magistrate.” FACTUAL MATRIX
5. The respondent herein, namely, the “Tourism Finance Corporation of India Limited” (hereinafter
shall be referred to as, ‘the complainant’), had advanced a sum of Rs. 30,00,00,000/- (thirty crore)
as a corporate loan to the Rainbow Papers Limited (Original Accused No. 1/corporate debtor). The
appellant herein at the relevant point of time was the Managing Director of the company i.e. the
corporate debtor. The transaction between the parties took place on 31.03.2012. It appears that an
amount of Rs. 10.88 crore came to be repaid before the disputes arose between the parties.
Sometime in 2016, the complainant issued a notice to the corporate debtor to settle the balance
amount. On 16.05.2016, a complaint was lodged under Section 138 of the NI Act by the complainant
against the corporate debtor and the appellant herein (Managing Director of the Corporate Debtor)
for dishonour of the three cheques issued by the appellant herein for discharge of the debt in part to
the tune of Rs. 57,00,000/-
(fifty-seven lakhs).
6. The aforesaid complaint under Section 138 of the NI Act was registered in the Court of the Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate, Saket Court, New Delhi.
7. In 2017, one of the operational creditors filed an application under Section 9 of the Insolvency
and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (for short, ‘the IBC’ or ‘the IBC, 2016’) before the NCLT, Ahmedabad,
seeking to initiate Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (for short, ‘the CIRP’) with respect to
the corporate debtor.
8. The Insolvency application came to be admitted by the NCLT on 12.09.2017.
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
6
9. On 3.10.2017, the complainant filed its claim of Rs. 22,50,00,000/- crore (approximately) before
the Interim Resolution Professional (for short, ‘the IRP’).
10. On 26.05.2018, the resolution applicant filed its resolution plan under the terms of which, the
payment to the complainant was in full and final settlement of all its claims against the corporate
debtor.
11. On 05.06.2018, the Committee of Creditors (for short, ‘the CoC’) approved the resolution plan
proposed by the resolution applicant. The complainant was one of the members of the CoC.
12. On 23.07.2018, the complainant lodged his objections before the NCLT to the resolution plan in
so far as it changed its status from secured to unsecured creditor.
13. It appears that in the meantime, the appellant preferred an application before the trial court
seeking exemption from his personal appearance invoking a moratorium under Section 14 of the
IBC. The Magistrate vide order dated 12.11.2018 rejected the said application on the ground that the
criminal proceedings under the NI Act had nothing to do with the proceedings under the IBC.
14. On 27.02.2019, the NCLT approved the resolution plan so far as the corporate debtor is
concerned.
15. As the resolution plan came to be approved by the NCLT, the appellant herein filed an
application dated 20.07.2019 before the trial court, praying that he be discharged from the criminal
proceedings. The case of the appellant herein before the Magistrate was that as the debt stood
settled in the proceedings under the IBC, the criminal proceedings would not survive.
16. The trial court vide order dated 01.11.2019 rejected the aforesaid application essentially on the
ground that it had no jurisdiction to discharge an accused in a summons triable case.
17. In view of the aforesaid, the appellant herein filed the Criminal Revision Application No. 593 of
2019 before the Additional Sessions Court, challenging the order passed by the Magistrate dated
01.11.2019 referred to above. The appellant contended before the revisional court that as the debt in
connection with which the criminal proceedings had been initiated, formed part of the approved
resolution plan the outstanding debt under the NI Act could be said to have stood settled.
18. The Additional Judge vide the impugned order dated 23.11.2019 rejected the Revision
Application.
19. In such circumstances, referred to above, the appellant is here before this Court with the present
appeal.
THE SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
7
20. Mr. Nikhil Goel, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant made the following
submissions:
A. The trigger of Section 138 of the NI Act, is the non-payment of legally enforceable
debt. Once the debt itself gets extinguished either under Section 31 of the IBC or in
the process from Sections 38 to 41 and 54 resply of the IBC, the basis of Section 138
of the NI Act no longer remains. The term debt would mean the ‘legally enforceable
debt’ under the explanation to Section 138 of the NI Act. This may be read with
Section 2(6) & 2(8) resply of the IBC. B. The liability is primarily of the company and
prosecution of natural persons under Section 141 of the NI Act is vicarious to the
prosecution of the company. It is for this reason that a director cannot be prosecuted
without making the company as an accused. [See Ajit Balse v. Ranga Karkere: (2015)
15 SCC
748.] C. The nature of proceedings under Section 138 of the NI Act is primarily
compensatory and the punitive element is incorporated at enforcing the
compensatory provisions. (paras 53 & 63 resply in P. Mohanraj and Others v.
Shah Brothers Ispat Private Limited reported in (2021) 6 SCC 258). Therefore, once
recovery is made, partly by receipt of money and partly by waiver, Section 138 of the
NI Act should not be permitted to be continued. D. If the debt of the company is
resolved then payments would be governed under the resolution plan. If the debts are
not resolved then the assets of the company are to be distributed in terms of Section
53 of the IBC. Permitting two proceedings to continue would therefore defeat either
Section 31 or Section 53 of the IBC, as the case may be.
E. Mr. Goel submitted that this Court in P. Mohanraj (supra) considered the position
of law as regards the continuation of the criminal proceedings under Section 138 of
the NI Act vis-a-vis the proceedings under the IBC and answered the same in para
102 of the judgment. It was pointed out by Mr. Goel that this Court drew a fine
distinction between the corporate debtor and natural persons & ultimately held that
while a corporate debtor would be protected from Section 138 proceedings during the
period of moratorium, the natural persons would not enjoy such protection and
Section 138 proceedings would continue against the natural persons. However,
according to Mr. Goel, this Court may not go in the correctness of such bifurcation as
in the case on hand, the proceedings are beyond the period of moratorium. Mr. Goel
pointed out that the question framed in para 6 of the decision in P. Mohanraj (supra)
is restricted only to the applicability of Section 14 of the IBC to the proceedings under
Section 138 of the NI Act.
F. The principal argument of Mr. Goel is that if the IBC proceedings have travelled
beyond Section 14, the process would either lead to acceptance of a resolution plan
under Section 31 of the IBC or liquidation of the company after determination of the
claims under Chapter III of the IBC. According to Mr. Goel, Section 31 of the IBC is
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
8
applicable to the present litigation.
21. In such circumstances referred to above, Mr. Goel prays that there being merit in his appeal, the
same may be allowed and the appellant may be discharged from the criminal liability under Section
138 of the NI Act.
THE SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT (COMPLAINANT)
22. On the other hand, this appeal has been vehemently opposed by Mr. Rajiv Ranjan Dwivedi, the
learned counsel appearing for the complainant by submitting that in the case on hand, the criminal
proceedings under the NI Act were initiated much before the proceedings under the IBC came to be
initiated. In other words, cognizance was taken by the learned Magistrate upon the complaint filed
under Section 138 of the NI Act much before the scheme came to be approved under the IBC. He
would submit that the offence alleged to have been committed by the appellant herein prior to the
scheme would not get automatically compounded only as a result of the said scheme. He would
further submit that none of the provisions of the IBC bars the continuation of the criminal
prosecution initiated against the corporate debtor or its directors or officials. According to the
learned counsel, if the company is dissolved as a result of the resolution process, the criminal
proceedings against it would stand terminated, however, the signatory to the cheque or its erstwhile
directors are not entitled in law to take advantage of such a situation created by operation of law.
23. The learned counsel appearing for the complainant, laid much stress on Section 32A of the IBC,
which states that every person who was a ‘designated partner’ or an ‘officer who is in default’ or was
in any manner in charge of/responsible to the corporate debtor for the conduct of its business or
associated with the corporate debtor in any manner and who was directly or indirectly involved in
the commission of such offence in accordance with the report submitted or complaint filed by the
investigating authority shall continue to be liable to be prosecuted and punished for such an offence
committed by the corporate debtor notwithstanding that the corporate debtor’s liability has ceased
under the provision of Section 32A of the IBC.
24. In such circumstances, referred to above, the learned counsel prays that there being no merit in
the present appeal, the same may be dismissed.
ANALYSIS
25. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone through the
materials on record, the seminal question of law that falls for the consideration of this Court may be
formulated as under:
Whether in light of:
(i) the complainant having participated in the proceedings under the IBC, 2016 by
putting forward its claim and consenting to accept some share as a creditor; coupled
with
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
9
(ii) the approval of the resolution plan under Section 31 of the IBC, 2016;
the signatory/director in charge of the day-to-day affairs would stand
discharged/relieved from the penal liability under Section 138 of the NI Act?
26. Before adverting to the rival submissions canvassed on either side, it is necessary
to look into few relevant provisions of the NI Act as well as IBC, 2016.
27. Section 138 of the NI Act reads thus:
“138. Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc., of funds in the account.— Where
any cheque drawn by a person on an account maintained by him with a banker for
payment of any amount of money to another person from out of that account for the
discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability, is returned by the bank
unpaid, either because of the amount of money standing to the credit of that account
is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid
from that account by an agreement made with that bank, such person shall be
deemed to have committed an offence and shall, without prejudice to any other
provision of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may be
extended to two years, or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the
cheque, or with both:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply unless—
(a) the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the
date on which it is drawn or within the period of its validity, whichever is earlier;
(b) the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the case may be, makes a
demand for the payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to
the drawer of the cheque, within thirty days of the receipt of information by him from
the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid; and
(c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of the said amount of money
to the payee or, as the case may be, to the holder in due course of the cheque, within
fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, “debt of other liability” means a
legally enforceable debt or other liability.”
28. Section 139 of the NI Act raises presumption. The same reads thus:
“139. Presumption in favour of holder.— It shall be presumed, unless the contrary is
proved, that the holder of a cheque received the cheque of the nature referred to in
section 138 for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability.”
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
10
29. Section 141 of the NI Act fastens vicarious liability upon every person, who at the time of the
offence, was in charge of and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the
company. Section 141 reads thus:
“141. Offences by companies.— (1) If the person committing an offence under section
138 is a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in
charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any person liable to
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge, or
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence:
Provided further that where a person is nominated as a Director of a company by
virtue of his holding any office or employment in the Central Government or State
Government or a financial corporation owned or controlled by the Central
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, he shall not be liable for
prosecution under this Chapter. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), where any offence under this Act has been committed by a company
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance
of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, —
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of
individuals; and
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.”
30. Section 142 of the NI Act is in regard to the cognizance of offence. The same reads thus:
“142. Cognizance of offences.— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),
(a) no court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under section 138 except
upon a complaint, in writing, made by the payee or, as the case may be, the holder in
due course of the cheque;
(b) such complaint is made within one month of the date on which the cause of action
arises under clause (c) of the proviso to section 138: Provided that the cognizance of a
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
11
complaint may be taken by the Court after the prescribed period, if the complainant
satisfies the Court that he had sufficient cause for not making a complaint within
such period.
(c) no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of
the first class shall try any offence punishable under section
138. (2) The offence under section 138 shall be inquired into and tried only by a court
within whose local jurisdiction,—
(a) if the cheque is delivered for collection through an account, the branch of the
bank where the payee or holder in due course, as the case may be, maintains the
account, is situated; or
(b) if the cheque is presented for payment by the payee or holder in due course,
otherwise through an account, the branch of the drawee bank where the drawer
maintains the account, is situated. Explanation.— For the purposes of clause (a),
where a cheque is delivered for collection at any branch of the bank of the payee or
holder in due course, then, the cheque shall be deemed to have been delivered to the
branch of the bank in which the payee or holder in due course, as the case may be,
maintains the account.”
31. Section 147 of the NI Act provides that the offence under the NI Act shall be compoundable.
Section 147 reads thus:
“147. Offences to be compoundable.— Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), every offence punishable under this Act
shall be compoundable.”
32. The offence under Section 138 of the NI Act, is committed, after the conditions set out therein
are fulfilled. Thereafter, the payee of the cheque has the option of prosecuting the drawer of the
cheque by instituting a complaint under Section 200 of  the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for
short, ‘the CrPC’) before the jurisdictional criminal court. After cognizance of the offence is taken,
the criminal court is seized of the matter. The case will have to be disposed of in terms of the
provisions set out in the CrPC. If the complainant fails to turn up on any hearing date, the
Magistrate can invoke Section 256 of the CrPC and acquit the accused. Under Section 257 of the
CrPC, the complaint can be withdrawn at any point of time before the final order is passed. Under
Section 147 of the NI Act the offence can be compounded. The case may end in acquittal or
conviction at the conclusion of the trial.
33. Section 141 of the NI Act states that if the person committing an offence under Section 138 is a
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was
responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company,
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
12
accordingly. The expression “as well” is occurring in Section 141 of the NI Act. This expression
means “on par”. Therefore, the liability of such persons in charge of and responsible to the company
for the conduct of its business is thus co-extensive.
SCHEME OF THE IBC, 2016
34. I shall now try to understand the scheme of the IBC.
35. It is a comprehensive Code enacted, as the Preamble states, to “consolidate and amend the laws
relating to reorganisation and insolvency resolution of corporate persons, partnership firms and
individuals in a time bound manner for maximisation of value of assets of such persons, to promote
entrepreneurship, availability of credit and balance the interests of all the stakeholders including
alteration in the order of priority of payment of Government dues and to establish an Insolvency
and Bankruptcy Board of India, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto”.
36. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the IBC indicates that the Legislature was of the
opinion that the existing framework for insolvency and bankruptcy was inadequate and ineffective
and resulted in undue delays in resolution. The IBC was proposed with the objective of consolidating
and amending the laws relating to reorganisation and insolvency resolution of corporate persons,
partnership firms and individuals in a time bound manner for maximisation of the value of assets of
such persons, to promote entrepreneurship, availability of credit and balance the interests of all the
stakeholders, including alteration in the priority of payment of Government dues and to establish an
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund, and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The IBC
provides for designating the NCLT and the Debts Recovery Tribunal (DRT) as the adjudicating
authorities for corporate persons, firms and individuals for resolution of insolvency, liquidation and
bankruptcy. The IBC was published in the Gazette of India dated 28.05.2016. Provisions of the IBC
were, however, brought into effect from different dates in terms of the proviso to Section 1(3) of the
IBC.
37. Section 7 of IBC lays down the procedure for the initiation of the corporate insolvency resolution
process by the financial creditor or any other person or more financial creditors jointly. The
financial creditor may file an application before the adjudicating authority along with the proof of
default and the name of a resolution professional proposed to act as the interim resolution
professional in respect of the corporate debtor. Once the adjudicating authority is satisfied, as to the
extent of the default and is ensured that the application is complete and no disciplinary proceedings
are pending against the proposed resolution professional, it shall admit the application.
38. Section 8 of the IBC provides that an operational creditor may, on the occurrence of a default,
deliver a demand notice of unpaid operational debt or copy of an invoice demanding payment of the
amount involved in the default to the corporate debtor in such form and manner as may be
prescribed.
39. Section 9 of the IBC stipulates that after the expiry of the period of 10 days from the date of
delivery of the notice or invoice demanding payment under sub-section (1) of Section 8 if the
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
13
operational creditor does not receive payment from the corporate debtor or notice of the dispute
under sub-section (2) of Section 8, it would be open for the operational creditor to file an application
before the adjudicating authority for initiating a corporate insolvency resolution process.
40. After the initiation of the CIRP the following takes place:
(a) All the creditors are mandatorily required to put forward their claims before the CIRP in light of
the public announcement.
(b) In the aforesaid context, I must look into Sections 13 and 15 resply of the IBC.
Sections 13 and 15 resply are reproduced hereinbelow: “13. Declaration of moratorium and public
announcement. — (1) The Adjudicating Authority, after admission of the application under section 7
or section 9 or section 10, shall, by an order—
(a) declare a moratorium for the purposes referred to in section 14;
(b) cause a public announcement of the initiation of corporate insolvency resolution process and call
for the submission of claims under section 15; and
(c) appoint an interim resolution professional in the manner as laid down in section 16.
(2) The public announcement referred to in clause (b) of sub- section (1) shall be made immediately
after the appointment of the interim resolution professional.
Xxx xxx xxx
15. Public announcement of corporate insolvency resolution process.— (1) The public announcement
of the corporate insolvency resolution process under the order referred to in section 13 shall contain
the following information, namely:—
(a) name and address of the corporate debtor under the corporate insolvency resolution process;
(b) name of the authority with which the corporate debtor is incorporated or registered;
(c) the last date for submission of [claims, as may be specified];
(d) details of the interim resolution professional who shall be vested with the management of the
corporate debtor and be responsible for receiving claims;
(e) penalties for false or misleading claims; and
(f) the date on which the corporate insolvency resolution process shall close, which shall be the one
hundred and eightieth day from the date of the admission of the application under sections 7, 9 or
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
14
section 10, as the case may be.
(2) The public announcement under this section shall be made in such manner as may be specified.”
(c) It is important to note that the resolution professional has no adjudicatory powers in regard to
the claims unlike the liquidator. The resolution professional only collates the claims. In this regard,
the decision of this Court in the case of Swiss Ribbons Private Limited and Another v. Union of India
and Others reported in (2019) 4 SCC 17 assumes importance. I quote paras 88-91 of Swiss Ribbons
(supra) as under:
Resolution professional has no adjudicating powers “88. It is clear from a reading of
the Code as well as the Regulations that the resolution professional has no
adjudicatory powers. Section 18 of the Code lays down the duties of an interim
resolution professional as follows: “18. Duties of interim resolution professional.—(1)
The interim resolution professional shall perform the following duties, namely—
(a) collect all information relating to the assets, finances and operations of the
corporate debtor for determining the financial position of the corporate debtor,
including information relating to—
(i) business operations for the previous two years;
(ii) financial and operational payments for the previous two years;
(iii) list of assets and liabilities as on the initiation date; and
(iv) such other matters as may be specified;
(b) receive and collate all the claims submitted by creditors to him, pursuant to the
public announcement made under Sections 13 and 15;
(c) constitute a Committee of Creditors;
(d) monitor the assets of the corporate debtor and manage its operations until a
resolution professional is appointed by the Committee of Creditors;
(e) file information collected with the information utility, if necessary; and
(f) take control and custody of any asset over which the corporate debtor has
ownership rights as recorded in the balance sheet of the corporate debtor, or with
information utility or the depository of securities or any other registry that records
the ownership of assets including—
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
15
(i) assets over which the corporate debtor has ownership rights which may be located
in a foreign country;
(ii) assets that may or may not be in possession of the corporate debtor;
(iii) tangible assets, whether movable or immovable;
(iv) intangible assets including intellectual property;
(v) securities including shares held in any subsidiary of the corporate debtor,
financial instruments, insurance policies;
(vi) assets subject to the determination of ownership by a court or authority;
(g) to perform such other duties as may be specified by the Board. Explanation.—For
the purposes of this section, the term “assets” shall not include the following,
namely—
(a) assets owned by a third party in possession of the corporate debtor held under
trust or under contractual arrangements including bailment;
(b) assets of any Indian or foreign subsidiary of the corporate debtor; and
(c) such other assets as may be notified by the Central Government in consultation
with any financial sector regulator.”
89. Under the CIRP Regulations, the resolution professional has to vet and verify claims made, and
ultimately, determine the amount of each claim as follows:
“10. Substantiation of claims.—The interim resolution professional or the resolution professional, as
the case may be, may call for such other evidence or clarification as he deems fit from a creditor for
substantiating the whole or part of its claim.
* * *
12. Submission of proof of claims.—(1) Subject to sub-regulation (2), a creditor shall submit claim
with proof on or before the last date mentioned in the public announcement.
(2) A creditor, who fails to submit claim with proof within the time stipulated in the public
announcement, may submit the claim with proof to the interim resolution professional or the
resolution professional, as the case may be, on or before the ninetieth day of the insolvency
commencement date.
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
16
(3) Where the creditor in sub-regulation (2) is a financial creditor under Regulation 8, it shall be
included in the committee from the date of admission of such claim:
Provided that such inclusion shall not affect the validity of any decision taken by the committee
prior to such inclusion.
13. Verification of claims.—(1) The interim resolution professional or the resolution professional, as
the case may be, shall verify every claim, as on the insolvency commencement date, within seven
days from the last date of the receipt of the claims, and thereupon maintain a list of creditors
containing names of creditors along with the amount claimed by them, the amount of their claims
admitted and the security interest, if any, in respect of such claims, and update it.
(2) The list of creditors shall be—
(a) available for inspection by the persons who submitted proofs of claim;
(b) available for inspection by members, partners, Directors and guarantors of the corporate debtor;
(c) displayed on the website, if any, of the corporate debtor;
(d) filed with the adjudicating authority; and
(e) presented at the first meeting of the committee.
14. Determination of amount of claim.—(1) Where the amount claimed by a creditor is not precise
due to any contingency or other reason, the interim resolution professional or the resolution
professional, as the case may be, shall make the best estimate of the amount of the claim based on
the information available with him.
(2) The interim resolution professional or the resolution professional, as the case may be, shall
revise the amounts of claims admitted, including the estimates of claims made under sub-regulation
(1), as soon as may be practicable, when he comes across additional information warranting such
revision.” It is clear from a reading of these Regulations that the resolution professional is given
administrative as opposed to quasi-judicial powers. In fact, even when the resolution professional is
to make a “determination” under Regulation 35-A, he is only to apply to the adjudicating authority
for appropriate relief based on the determination made as follows:
“35-A. Preferential and other transactions.—(1) On or before the seventy-fifth day of the insolvency
commencement date, the resolution professional shall form an opinion whether the corporate
debtor has been subjected to any transaction covered under Sections 43, 45, 50 or 66. (2) Where the
resolution professional is of the opinion that the corporate debtor has been subjected to any
transactions covered under Sections 43, 45, 50 or 66, he shall make a determination on or before the
one hundred and fifteenth day of the insolvency commencement date, under intimation to the
Board.
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
17
(3) Where the resolution professional makes a determination under sub- regulation (2), he shall
apply to the adjudicating authority for appropriate relief on or before the one hundred and
thirty-fifth day of the insolvency commencement date.”
90. As opposed to this, the liquidator, in liquidation proceedings under the Code, has to consolidate
and verify the claims, and either admit or reject such claims under Sections 38 to 40 of the Code.
Sections 41 and 42, by way of contrast between the powers of the liquidator and that of the
resolution professional, are set out hereinbelow:
“41. Determination of valuation of claims.—The liquidator shall determine the value of claims
admitted under Section 40 in such manner as may be specified by the Board.
42. Appeal against the decision of liquidator.—A creditor may appeal to the adjudicating authority
against the decision of the liquidator accepting or rejecting the claims within fourteen days of the
receipt of such decision.” It is clear from these sections that when the liquidator “determines” the
value of claims admitted under Section 40, such determination is a “decision”, which is
quasi-judicial in nature, and which can be appealed against to the adjudicating authority under
Section 42 of the Code.
91. Unlike the liquidator, the resolution professional cannot act in a number of matters without the
approval of the Committee of Creditors under Section 28 of the Code, which can, by a two-thirds
majority, replace one resolution professional with another, in case they are unhappy with his
performance. Thus, the resolution professional is really a facilitator of the resolution process, whose
administrative functions are overseen by the Committee of Creditors and by the adjudicating
authority.”
(d) Section 29 of the IBC deals with the information memorandum on the basis of which the
resolution plan would be submitted. In this regard, Regulation 36 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Board of India (Insolvency Resolution Process for Corporate Persons) Regulations, 2016, assumes
importance wherein Regulation 36(2)(d) covers the claims of different kinds of creditors. Regulation
36(2)(d) reads thus:
“36. Information memorandum.-(1) Subject to sub-regulation (4), the resolution
professional shall submit the information memorandum in electronic form to each
member of the committee within two weeks of his appointment, but not later than
fifty-fourth day from the insolvency commencement date, whichever is earlier.
(2) The information memorandum shall contain the following details of the corporate
debtor-
        (a) xxxx
                      Xx                   xx                  xx
(d) a list of creditors containing the names of creditors, the amounts claimed by
them, the amount of their claims admitted and the security interest, if any, in respect
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
18
of such claims;…..”
(e) In the aforesaid context, I may look into the decision of this Court in the case of
Committee of Creditors of Essar Steel India Limited v. Satish Kumar Gupta and
Others reported in (2020) 8 SCC 531, more particularly, paras 42-45 which read
thus:
“42. Under Section 29(1) of the Code, the resolution professional shall prepare an
information memorandum containing all relevant information, as may be specified,
so that a resolution plan may then be formulated by a prospective resolution
applicant. Under Section 30 of the Code, the resolution applicant must then submit a
resolution plan to the resolution professional, prepared on the basis of the
information memorandum. After this, the resolution professional must present to the
Committee of Creditors, for its approval, such resolution plans which conform to the
conditions referred to in Section 30(2) of the Code — see Section 30(3) of the Code. If
the resolution plan is approved by the requisite majority of the Committee of
Creditors, it is then the duty of the resolution professional to submit the resolution
plan as approved by the Committee of Creditors to the Adjudicating Authority — see
Section 30(6) of the Code.
43. The aforesaid provisions of the Code are then fleshed out in the 2016 Regulations.
Under Chapter IV of the aforesaid Regulations, claims by operational creditors,
financial creditors, other creditors, workmen and employees are to be submitted to
the resolution professional along with proofs thereof — see Regulations 7 to 12.
Thereafter, under Regulation 13, the resolution professional shall verify each claim as
on the insolvency commencement date, and thereupon maintain a list of creditors
containing the names of creditors along with the amounts claimed by them, the
amounts admitted by him, and the security interest, if any, in respect of such claims,
and constantly update the aforesaid list — see Regulation 13(1).
44. Chapter X of the Regulations then deals with resolution plans that are submitted. Under
Regulation 35, “fair value” as defined by Regulation 2(1) (hb) [Under Regulation 2(1)(hb),
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (Insolvency Resolution Process for Corporate Persons)
Regulations, 2016:“2. (1)(hb) “fair value” means the estimated realisable value of the assets of the
corporate debtor, if they were to be exchanged on the insolvency commencement date between a
willing buyer and a willing seller in an arm's length transaction, after proper marketing and where
the parties had acted knowledgeably, prudently and without compulsion;”] and “liquidation value”
as defined by Regulation 2(1)(k) [Id. Under Regulation 2(1)(k):“2. (1)(k) “liquidation value” means
the estimated realisable value of the assets of the corporate debtor, if the corporate debtor were to
be liquidated on the insolvency commencement date;”] shall be determined by two registered
valuers appointed under Regulation 27, which shall be handed over to the resolution professional.
45. After receipt of the resolution plans in accordance with the Code and the Regulations, the
resolution professional shall then provide the fair value and liquidation value to every member of
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
19
the Committee of Creditors — see Regulation 35(2). Regulation 36 is important as it forms the basis
for the submission of a resolution plan. The information memorandum, spoken of by this
regulation, must contain the following:
“36.(2)(a) assets and liabilities with such description, as on the insolvency
commencement date, as are generally necessary for ascertaining their values.
Explanation.—“Description” includes the details such as date of acquisition, cost of
acquisition, remaining useful life, identification number, depreciation charged, book
value, and any other relevant details.
(b) the latest annual financial statements;
(c) audited financial statements of the corporate debtor for the last two financial
years and provisional financial statements for the current financial year made up to a
date not earlier than fourteen days from the date of the application;
(d) a list of creditors containing the names of creditors, the amounts claimed by
them, the amount of their claims admitted and the security interest, if any, in respect
of such claims;
(e) particulars of a debt due from or to the corporate debtor with respect to related
parties;
(f) details of guarantees that have been given in relation to the debts of the corporate
debtor by other persons, specifying which of the guarantors is a related party;
(g) the names and addresses of the members or partners holding at least one per cent
stake in the corporate debtor along with the size of stake;
(h) details of all material litigation and an ongoing investigation or proceeding
initiated by Government and statutory authorities;
(i) the number of workers and employees and liabilities of the corporate debtor
towards them;
(j)-(k)***
(l) other information, which the resolution professional deems relevant to the
committee.””
(f) On the basis of the information memorandum, the resolution plan is submitted
under Section 30(1) of the IBC.
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
20
(g) It is important to note that the operational creditors are mandatorily entitled to the liquidation
value or the amount that the plan entitles them if distributed in accordance with the waterfall
mechanism under Section 53 whichever is higher. (See Section 30 (2)
(b))
(h) For dissenting financial creditors, they are mandatorily entitled to the amount under Section 53
in the event of liquidation.
(i) The constitutional validity of the said provision was upheld by this Court in the decision of Essar
Steel India Limited (supra). (See paras 128-131)
(j) If the plan fails to comply with the above, the resolution plan is liable to be mandatorily rejected.
(k) Section 31 of the IBC deals with the approval of the resolution plan which shall bind everyone i.e.
the corporate debtor, guarantors, creditors, other stakeholders etc. Thus, whatever amount is
allotted to the creditor under the plan, the same will have to be accepted without any option.
(l) The new avatar of the corporate debtor does not have to deal with the various “hydra heads”, i.e.
multiple new claims popping up after the approval of the plan (para 107 of the Essar Steel (supra)
(m) The aforesaid has been accepted as a “Clean Slate Theory”. (See paras 93-94 of Ghanashyam
Mishra & Sons (P) Ltd. v. Edelweiss Asset Reconstruction Co. Ltd., (2021) 9 SCC 657).
(n) This Court in Ebix Singapore Private Limited v. Committee of Creditors of Educomp Solutions
Limited and Another reported in (2022) 2 SCC 401, has held that the resolution plan binds even the
persons who have not consented. Paras 115 & 117 resply read thus:-
“115. While the above observations were made in the context of a scheme that has
been sanctioned by the court, the resolution plan even prior to the approval of the
adjudicating authority is binding inter se the CoC and the successful resolution
applicant. The resolution plan cannot be construed purely as a “contract” governed
by the Contract Act, in the period interven- ing its acceptance by the CoC and the
approval of the adjudicating authority. Even at that stage, its binding effects are
produced by IBC framework. The BLRC Report mentions that “[w]hen 75% of the
creditors agree on a revival plan, this plan would be binding on all the remaining
creditors” [ 3.3.1, The Report of the Bankruptcy Law Reforms Committee, Vol. I :
R a t i o n a l e  a n d  D e s i g n  ( N o v e m b e r  2 0 1 5 ) ,  p .  1 3 ,  a v a i l a b l e  a t
<https://ibbi.gov.in/BLRCRe- portVol1_04112015.pdf> last accessed 20-8-2021.].
The BLRC Report also mentions that, “the RP submits a binding agreement to the
adjudicator be- fore the default maximum date” [Id, p. 92.]. We have further
discussed the statutory scheme of IBC in Sections I and J of this judgment to
establish that a resolution plan is binding inter se the CoC and the successful
resolution applicant. Thus, the ability of the resolution plan to bind those who have
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
21
not consented to it, by way of a statutory procedure, indicates that it is not a typical
contract.
Xxx xxx xxx
117. ….. The terms of the resolution plan contain a commercial bargain between the
CoC and resolution applicant. There is also an intention to create legal relations with
binding effect. However, it is the structure of IBC which confers legal force on the
CoC-approved resolution plan. The validity of the resolution plan is not premised
upon the agreement or consent of those bound (although as a procedural step IBC
requires sixty- six per cent votes of creditors), but upon its compliance with the
procedure stipulated under IBC.” (Emphasis supplied)
41. Thus, from the aforesaid, it is evident that the creditor has no option but to join the process
under the IBC. Once the plan is approved, it would bind everyone under the sun. The making of a
claim and accepting whatever share is allotted could be termed as an “Involuntary Act” on behalf of
the creditor. The making of a claim under the IBC and ac- cepting the same and not making any
claim, will not make any difference in light of Sec- tion 31 of the IBC. Both the situations will lead to
Section 31 and the finality and bind- ing value of the resolution plan.
42. Keeping the aforesaid discussion in mind, at best, it could be said that from the cheque amount
under Section 138 of the NI Act, the amount received under the resolution plan may be deducted.
(akin to what happens to the guarantors) SECTION 32A OF THE IBC
43. P. Mohanraj (supra) has harmoniously construed Section 32A with Section 14 of the IBC so as to
apply to Section 138 NI Act, proceedings. Section 32A(1) is very crucial and hence, is quoted below:-
“32A. Liability for prior offences, etc.—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in this Code or any other law for the time being in force, the liability of a
corporate debtor for an offence committed prior to the commencement of the
corporate insolvency resolution process shall cease, and the corporate debtor shall
not be prosecuted for such an offence from the date the resolution plan has been
approved by the Adjudicating Authority under section 31, if the resolution plan
results in the change in the management or control of the corporate debtor to a
person who was not—
(a) a promoter or in the management or control of the corporate debtor or a related
party of such a person; or
(b) a person with regard to whom the relevant investigating authority has, on the
basis of material in its possession, reason to believe that he had abetted or conspired
for the commission of the offence, and has submitted or filed a report or a complaint
to the relevant statutory authority or court:
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
22
Provided that if a prosecution had been instituted during the corporate insolvency
resolution process against such corporate debtor, it shall stand discharged from the
date of approval of the resolution plan subject to requirements of this sub-section
having been fulfilled:
Provided further that every person who was a “designated partner” as defined in
clause (j) of section 2 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009), or
an “officer who is in default”, as defined in clause (60) of section 2 of the Companies
Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), or was in any manner incharge of, or responsible to the
corporate debtor for the conduct of its business or associated with the corporate
debtor in any manner and who was directly or indirectly involved in the commission
of such offence as per the report submitted or complaint filed by the investigating
authority, shall continue to be liable to be prosecuted and punished for such an
offence committed by the corporate debtor notwithstanding that the corporate
debtor's liability has ceased under this sub-section.”
44. Section 32A of the IBC has been upheld by this Court in Manish Kumar v. Union of India and
Another reported in (2021) 5 SCC 1. This Court has held that the said section does not permit the
wrong-doer to get away. Thus, if the argument of allowing the signatory/director to go scot-free after
the approval of the resolution plan is accepted the same would run contrary to the legislative intent
of Section 32A which has been upheld by this Court as under:
“326. We are of the clear view that no case whatsoever is made out to seek
invalidation of Section 32-A. The boundaries of this Court's jurisdiction are clear. The
wisdom of the legislation is not open to judicial review. Having regard to the object of
the Code, the experience of the working of the Code, the interests of all stakeholders
including most importantly the imperative need to attract resolution applicants who
would not shy away from offering reasonable and fair value as part of the resolution
plan if the legislature thought that immunity be granted to the corporate debtor as
also its property, it hardly furnishes a ground for this Court to interfere. The
provision is carefully thought out. It is not as if the wrongdoers are allowed to get
away. They remain liable. The extinguishment of the criminal liability of the
corporate debtor is apparently important to the new management to make a clean
break with the past and start on a clean slate. We must also not overlook the principle
that the impugned provision is part of an economic measure. The reverence courts
justifiably hold such laws in cannot but be applicable in the instant case as well. The
provision deals with reference to offences committed prior to the commencement of
the CIRP. With the admission of the application the management of the corporate
debtor passes into the hands of the interim resolution professional and thereafter
into the hands of the resolution professional subject undoubtedly to the control by
the Committee of Creditors. As far as protection afforded to the property is concerned
there is clearly a rationale behind it. Having regard to the object of the statute we
hardly see any manifest arbitrariness in the provision.” (Emphasis supplied)
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
23
45. In P. Mohanraj (supra), this Court in clear terms held that Section 32A only protects the
corporate debtor and not the signatories/directors etc. The prosecution against the
signatories/directors would continue. In P. Mohanraj (supra): -
a. The issue involved was whether the institution/continuation of a proceeding under
Section 138/141 of the NI Act, 1881 is said to be covered by Section 14 of the IBC,
2016.
b. That Section 138 proceedings can be said to be a "civil sheep" in a "criminal wolf's"
clothing.
i. The Court relied upon Kaushalya Devi Massand v. Roopkishore Khore, (Para 59)
[(2011)4 SCC 593] and Meters & Instruments (P) Ltd. v. Kanchan Mehta, (Para 63)
[(2018)1 SCC 560] c. Section 138 proceedings are covered by Section 14 of the IBC,
2016. (Para 67) d. Moratorium under Section 14, IBC only applies to the Corporate
Debtor and does not apply to natural persons mentioned under Section 141 of NI Act,
1881. The said conclusion is reached after considering Aneeta Hada v. Godfather
Travels & Tours (P) Ltd., (2012) 5 SCC
661. (Para 102) e. I quote para 102 of P. Mohanraj (supra) as under:
“102. Since the corporate debtor would be covered by the moratorium provision
contained in Section 14 IBC, by which continuation of Sec- tions 138/141 proceedings
against the corporate debtor and initiation of Sections 138/141 proceedings against
the said debtor during the cor- porate insolvency resolution process are interdicted,
what is stated in paras 51 and 59 in Aneeta Hada ((2012) 5 SCC 661) would then be-
come applicable. The legal impediment contained in Section 14 IBC would make it
impossible for such proceeding to continue or be insti- tuted against the corporate
debtor. Thus, for the period of morato- rium, since no Sections 138/141 proceeding
can continue or be initi- ated against the corporate debtor because of a statutory bar,
such pro- ceedings can be initiated or continued against the persons mentioned in
Sections 141(1) and (2) of the Negotiable Instruments Act. This be- ing the case, it is
clear that the moratorium provision contained in Section 14 IBC would apply only to
the corporate debtor, the natural persons mentioned in Section 141 continuing to be
statutorily liable under Chapter XVII of the Negotiable Instruments Act.” (Emphasis
supplied)
46. While dealing with the issue of Section 14, IBC, this Court had the occasion to deal in detail with
Section 32A also. The 2nd proviso to Section 32A(1) is a complete answer to the issue in question.
The said provision is discussed in detail from Paras 39-43 in P. Mohanraj’s case. Paras 39 to 43 read
thus:
“39. The raison d'être for the enactment of Section 32-A has been stated by the
Report of the Insolvency Law Committee of February 2020, which is as follows:
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
24
“17. LIABILITY OF CORPORATE DEBTOR FOR OFFENCES COMMITTED PRIOR
TO INITIATION OF CIRP [Recommendations contained herein have been
implemented pursuant to Section 10 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2019.] 17.1. Section 17 of the Code provides that on
commencement of the CIRP, the powers of management of the corporate debtor vest
with the interim resolution professional. Further, the powers of the Board of
Directors or partners of the corporate debtor stand suspended, and are to be
exercised by the interim resolution professional. Thereafter, Section 29-A, read with
Section 35(1)(f), places restrictions on related parties of the corporate debtor from
proposing a resolution plan and purchasing the property of the corporate debtor in
the CIRP and liquidation process, respectively. Thus, in most cases, the provisions of
the Code effectuate a change in control of the corporate debtor that results in a clean
break of the corporate debtor from its erstwhile management. However, the legal
form of the corporate debtor continues in the CIRP, and may be preserved in the
resolution plan. Additionally, while the property of the corporate debtor may also
change hands upon resolution or liquidation, such property also continues to exist,
either as property of the corporate debtor, or in the hands of the purchaser.
17.2. However, even after commencement of CIRP or after its successful resolution or
liquidation, the corporate debtor, along with its property, would be susceptible to
investigations or proceedings related to criminal offences committed by it prior to the
commencement of a CIRP, leading to the imposition of certain liabilities and
restrictions on the corporate debtor and its properties even after they were lawfully
acquired by a resolution applicant or a successful bidder, respectively.
Liability where a Resolution Plan has been approved 17.3. It was brought to the Committee that this
had created apprehension amongst potential resolution applicants, who did not want to take on the
liability for any offences committed prior to commencement of CIRP. In one case, JSW Steel had
specifically sought certain reliefs and concessions, within an annexure to the resolution plan it had
submitted for approval of the adjudicating authority. [SBI v. Bhushan Steel Ltd., 2018 SCC OnLine
NCLT 32305, para 83(i)] Without relief from imposition of the such liability, the Committee noted
that in the long run, potential resolution applicants could be disincentivised from proposing a
resolution plan. The Committee was also concerned that resolution plans could be priced lower on
an average, even where the corporate debtor did not commit any offence and was not subject to
investigation, due to adverse selection by resolution applicants who might be apprehensive that they
might be held liable for offences that they have not been able to detect due to information
asymmetry. Thus, the threat of liability falling on bona fide persons who acquire the legal entity,
could substantially lower the chances of its successful takeover by potential resolution applicants.
17.4. This could have substantially hampered the Code's goal of value maximisation, and lowered
recoveries to creditors, including financial institutions who take recourse to the Code for resolution
of the NPAs on their balance sheet. At the same time, the Committee was also conscious that
authorities are duty-bound to penalise the commission of any offence, especially in cases involving
substantial public interest. Thus, two competing concerns need to be balanced.
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
25
Xxx xxx xxx 17.6. Given this, the Committee felt that a distinction must be drawn between the
corporate debtor which may have committed offences under the control of its previous
management, prior to the CIRP, and the corporate debtor that is resolved, and taken over by an
unconnected resolution applicant. While the corporate debtor's actions prior to the commencement
of the CIRP must be investigated and penalised, the liability must be affixed only upon those who
were responsible for the corporate debtor's actions in this period. However, the new management of
the corporate debtor, which has nothing to do with such past offences, should not be penalised for
the actions of the erstwhile management of the corporate debtor, unless they themselves were
involved in the commission of the offence, or were related parties, promoters or other persons in
management and control of the corporate debtor at the time of or any time following the
commission of the offence, and could acquire the corporate debtor, notwithstanding the prohibition
under Section 29-A. [For example, where the exemption under Section 240-A is applicable.] 17.7.
Thus, the Committee agreed that a new section should be inserted to provide that where the
corporate debtor is successfully resolved, it should not be held liable for any offence committed prior
to the commencement of the CIRP, unless the successful resolution applicant was also involved in
the commission of the offence, or was a related party, promoter or other person in management and
control of the corporate debtor at the time of or any time following the commission of the offence.
17.8. Notwithstanding this, those persons who were responsible to the corporate debtor for the
conduct of its business at the time of the commission of such offence, should continue to be liable
for such an offence, vicariously or otherwise, regardless of the fact that the corporate debtor's
liability has ceased.” (emphasis in original and supplied)
40. This Court in Manish Kumar v. Union of India [(2021) 5 SCC 1], upheld the constitutional
validity of this provision. This Court observed : (SCC pp. 170-71, para 326) “326. We are of the clear
view that no case whatsoever is made out to seek invalidation of Section 32-A. The boundaries of
this Court's jurisdiction are clear. The wisdom of the legislation is not open to judicial review.
Having regard to the object of the Code, the experience of the working of the Code, the interests of
all stakeholders including most importantly the imperative need to attract resolution applicants who
would not shy away from offering reasonable and fair value as part of the resolution plan if the
legislature thought that immunity be granted to the corporate debtor as also its property, it hardly
furnishes a ground for this Court to interfere. The provision is carefully thought out. It is not as if
the wrongdoers are allowed to get away. They remain liable. The extinguishment of the criminal
liability of the corporate debtor is apparently important to the new management to make a clean
break with the past and start on a clean slate. We must also not overlook the principle that the
impugned provision is part of an economic measure. The reverence courts justifiably hold such laws
in cannot but be applicable in the instant case as well. The provision deals with reference to offences
committed prior to the commencement of the CIRP. With the admission of the application the
management of the corporate debtor passes into the hands of the interim resolution professional
and thereafter into the hands of the resolution professional subject undoubtedly to the control by
the Committee of Creditors. As far as protection afforded to the property is concerned there is
clearly a rationale behind it. Having regard to the object of the statute we hardly see any manifest
arbitrariness in the provision.”
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
26
41. Section 32-A cannot possibly be said to throw any light on the true in- terpretation of Section
14(1)(a) as the reason for introducing Section 32-A had nothing whatsoever to do with any
moratorium provision. At the heart of the section is the extinguishment of criminal liability of the
corporate debtor, from the date the resolution plan has been approved by the adjudi- cating
authority, so that the new management may make a clean break with the past and start on a clean
slate. A moratorium provision, on the other hand, does not extinguish any liability, civil or criminal,
but only casts a shadow on proceedings already initiated and on proceedings to be initiated, which
shadow is lifted when the moratorium period comes to an end. Also, Section 32-A(1) operates only
after the moratorium comes to an end. At the heart of Section 32-A is the IBC's goal of value
maximisation and the need to obviate lower recoveries to creditors as a result of the corporate
debtor continuing to be exposed to criminal liability.
42. Unfortunately, Section 32-A is inelegantly drafted. The second proviso to Section 32-A(1) speaks
of persons who are in any manner in charge of, or responsible to the corporate debtor for the
conduct of its business or as- sociated with the corporate debtor and who are, directly or indirectly,
in- volved in the commission of “such offence” i.e. the offence referred to in sub-section (1), “as per
the report submitted or complaint filed by the in- vestigating authority …”. The report submitted
here refers to a police re- port under Section 173 CrPC, and complaints filed by investigating author-
ities under special Acts, as opposed to private complaints. If the language of the second proviso is
taken to interpret the language of Section 32- A(1) in that the “offence committed” under Section
32-A(1) would not include offences based upon complaints under Section 2(d) CrPC, the width of
the language would be cut down and the object of Section 32-A(1) would not be achieved as all
prosecutions emanating from private complaints would be excluded. Obviously, Section 32-A(1)
cannot be read in this fashion and clearly incudes the liability of the corporate debtor for all offences
com- mitted prior to the commencement of the corporate insolvency resolution process. Doubtless,
a Section 138 proceeding would be included, and would, after the moratorium period comes to an
end with a resolution plan by a new management being approved by the adjudicating authority,
cease to be an offence qua the corporate debtor.
43. A section which has been introduced by an amendment into an Act with its focus on cesser of
liability for offences committed by the corporate debtor prior to the commencement of the corporate
insolvency resolution process cannot be so construed so as to limit, by a sidewind as it were, the
moratorium provision contained in Section 14, with which it is not at all concerned. If the first
proviso to Section 32-A(1) is read in the manner suggested by Shri Mehta, it will impact Section 14
by taking out of its ken Sections 138/141 proceedings, which is not the object of Section 32- A(1) at
all. Assuming, therefore, that there is a clash between Section 14 IBC and the first proviso of Section
32-A(1), this clash is best resolved by applying the doctrine of harmonious construction so that the
objects of both the provisions get subserved in the process, without damaging or limiting one
provision at the expense of the other. If, therefore, the ex- pression “prosecution” in the first proviso
of Section 32-A(1) refers to criminal proceedings properly so-called either through the medium of a
first information report or complaint filed by an investigating authority or complaint and not to
quasi-criminal proceedings that are instituted under Sections 138/141 of the Negotiable Instruments
Act against the corporate debtor, the object of Section 14(1) IBC gets subserved, as does the object of
Section 32-A, which does away with criminal prosecutions in all cases against the corporate debtor,
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
27
thus absolving the corporate debtor from the same after a new management comes in.” (Emphasis
applied) Thus, the heart of the matter is the second proviso appended to Section 32A(1)
(b) of the IBC which provides statutory recognition of the criminal liability of the persons who are
otherwise vicariously liable under Section 141 of NI Act, in the con- text of Section 138 offence.
46. Thus, Section 32A broadly leads to:
a. Extinguishment of the criminal liability of the corporate debtor, if the control of
the corporate debtor goes in the hands of the new management which is different
from the original old management. b. The prosecution in relation to “every person
who was a “designated part- ner” as defined in clause (j) of Section 2 of the Limited
Liability Part- nership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009), or an “officer who is in default”, as
defined in clause (60) of Section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), or was in
any manner in charge of, or responsible to the corpo- rate debtor for the conduct of
its business or associated with the corpo- rate debtor in any manner and who was
directly or indirectly involved in the commission of such offence” shall be proceeded
and the law will take it’s own course. Only the corporate debtor (with new
management) as held in Para 42 of P. Mohanraj will be safeguarded.
c. If the old management takes over the corporate debtor (for MSME Section 29A
does not apply (see 240A), hence for MSME old manage- ment can takeover) the
corporate debtor itself is also not safeguarded from prosecution under Section 138 or
any other offences.
47. Thus, I am of the view that by operation of the provisions of the IBC, the criminal prosecution
initiated against the natural persons under Section 138 read with 141 of the NI Act read with Section
200 of the CrPC would not stand terminated.
48. In JIK Industries Limited and Others v. Amarlal V. Jumani and Another reported in (2012) 3
SCC 255, this Court held that the sanction of a scheme under Section 391 of the Companies Act, 1956
will not lead to any automatic compounding of offence under Section 138 of the NI Act without the
consent of the complainant. Neither Section 14 nor Section 31 of the IBC can produce such a result.
The binding effect contemplated by Section 31 of the IBC is in respect of the assets and management
of the corporate debtor. No clause in the resolution plan even if accepted by the adjudicating
authority/appellate tribunal can take away the power and jurisdiction of the criminal court to
conduct and dispose of the proceedings before it in accordance with the provisions of the CrPC.
49. It is true that by virtue of Section 238 of the IBC, the provisions of the CrPC shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in
force or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law. But, no provision of the IBC bars the
continuation of the criminal prosecution initiated against the directors and officials.
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
28
50. It is equally true that once the corporate debtor comes under the resolution process, its erstwhile
managing director(s) cannot continue to represent the company. Section 305(2) of the CrPC states
that where a corporation is the accused person or one of the accused persons in an inquiry or trial, it
may appoint a representative for the purpose of the inquiry or trial and such appointment need not
be under the seal of the corporation. Therefore, it is only the Resolution Professional who can
represent the accused company during the pendency of the proceedings under IBC. After the
proceedings are over, either the corporate entity may be dissolved or it can be taken over by a new
management in which event the company will continue to exist. When a new management takes
over, it will have to make arrangements for representing the company. If the company is dissolved
as a result of the resolution process, obviously proceedings against it will have to be terminated. But
even then, its erstwhile directors may not be able to take advantage of the situation. This is because,
this Court in Aneeta Hada (supra), even while overruling its decision in Anil Hada v. Indian Acrylic
Ltd. reported in (2000) 1 SCC 1, as not laying down the correct law in so far as Anil Hada (supra)
states that the director or any other officer can be prosecuted without impleadment of the company,
proceeded to hold that the matter would stand on a different footing where there is some legal
impediment as the doctrine of lex non cogit ad impossibilia gets attracted. It was specifically
observed that the decision in Anil Hada (supra) is overruled with the qualifier as stated in para 51.
Considering the same, the ratio of the decision of this Court in Ajit Balse (supra) upon which strong
reliance is placed on behalf of the appellant is of no avail.
51. What follows from the aforesaid is that for difficulty in prosecuting the corporate debtor under
Section 138 of the NI Act after the approval of the resolution plan under the IBC, we need not let the
natural persons i.e., the signatories to the cheques/directors of the corporate debtor escape
prosecution. How can one allow the natural persons to escape liability on such specious plea? In
such a situation the Latin maxim Lex Non Cogit Ad Impossibilia is attracted which means law does
not compel a man to do which he cannot possibly perform. Broom's "Legal Maxims" contains
several illustrative cases in support of the maxim. This maxim has been referred to with approval by
this Court in State of Rajasthan v. Shamsher Singh reported in 1985 supp SCC 416.
52. Thus, where the proceedings under Section 138 of the NI Act had already commenced and
during the pendency the plan is approved or the company gets dissolved, the directors and the other
accused cannot escape from their liability by citing its dissolution. What is dissolved is only the
company, not the personal penal liability of the accused covered under Section 141 of the NI Act.
They will have to continue to face the prosecution in view of the law laid down in Aneeta Hada
(supra). Where the company continues to remain even at the end of the resolution process, the only
consequence is that the erstwhile directors can no longer represent it.
FEW OF THE ABSURD SITUATIONS THAT MAY ARISE IF SECTION 138 PROCEEDINGS IN
RELATION TO THE SIGNATORIES/DIRECTORS ARE HELD TO BE NOT MAINTAINABLE
AFTER THE RESOLUTION PLAN IS APPROVED
53. If the argument that the signatories/directors are not liable to be proceeded under Section
138/141 of the NI Act once the resolution plan is approved, the same may lead to the following
absurd situations:
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
29
i. If during the lifetime of the Section 14 moratorium order, some of the ac-
cused are convicted under Section 138 of the NI Act, they will have to be re- leased in
appeal once the resolution plan is approved. Thus, then, no purpose would be served
by proceeding further against the co-accused under Section 138 during the
moratorium.
ii. If the resolution plan is not approved and the corporate debtor goes under liq-
uidation in such circumstances under Section 35(1)(k) of the IBC the liquida- tor can
represent the corporate debtor. Thus, the prosecution under Section 138/141
continues. This may lead to absurd situations in working of the IBC and its impact on
Section 138 proceedings.
iii. At the end of the liquidation, the distribution will take place under Section 53 of
the IBC. Therein everyone, including the creditors will get their share as per the
waterfall mechanism statutorily decided and the same would be binding and
mandatory. Thereafter, the corporate debtor is dissolved under Section 54 of the IBC
after selling of the assets under liquidation. Now during the said period, the
prosecution might have been completed and appeals would be pending. Then it
would be argued that because under the liquidation the amount is accepted, the
prosecution against the signatory/director cannot con- tinue after the dissolution of
the corporate debtor.
54. Thus, while interpreting Sections 14, 31 & 32A resply of the IBC vis-a-vis Sections 138 and 141
resply of the NI Act, the principle of harmonious construction should be ap- plied and followed. By
permitting to proceed against the signatories/directors even after the approval of the plan, what is
achieved is uniformity in the functioning of the law by removing the anomalous and absurd
situations, thereby, making it compliant with Article 14 of the Constitution. The said interpretation
shields the relevant provisions from attack of being manifestly arbitrary.
55. The distinction between a strict construction and a more free one has disappeared in the modern
times and now mostly the question is, “what is the true construction of the statute?” A passage in
Craies on Statue Law 7th Edn. reads to the following effect:-
“The distinction between a strict and a liberal construction has almost disappeared
with regard to all classes of statutes, so that all statutes, whether penal or not, are
now construed by substantially the same rules. 'All modern Acts are framed with
regard to equitable as well as legal principles.' "A hundred years ago", said the court
in Lyons' case, "statutes were required to be perfectly precise and resort was not had
to a reasonable construction of the Act, and thereby criminals were often allowed to
escape. This is not the present mode of construing Acts of Parliament. They are
construed now with reference to the true meaning and real intention of the
legislature.”
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
30
56. At page-532 of the same book, observations of Sedgwick are quoted as under:
“The more correct version of the doctrine appears to be that statutes of this class are
to be fairly construed and faithfully applied according to the intent of the legislature
without unwarrantable severity on the one hand or unjustifiable lenity on the other,
in cases of doubt the courts inclining to mercy.” ARGUMENT THAT AS THE DEBT
STOOD EXTINGUISHED BY VIRTUE OF SECTION 31 OF THE CODE, THE
CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS U/S. 138 OF THE NI ACT CANNOT CONTINUE AS
REGARDS THE DIRECTOR/SIGNA-
TORY.
57. The argument that as the debt stood extinguished by virtue of Section 31 of the IBC, the
proceedings under Section 138 of the NI Act cannot continue as regards the di- rector/signatory,
would run contrary to the line of reasoning assigned by this Court that the “Involuntary Act” of the
principal debtor would not absolve the guarantors.
58. This Court in Lalit Kumar Jain v. Union of India and Others reported in (2021) 9 SCC 321 has
held that the approval of the resolution plan per se does not operate as a discharge of guarantors’
liability. That is because:
a. an involuntary act of the principal debtor leading to loss of security, would not
absolve a guarantor of its liability.
b. a discharge which the principal debtor may secure by operation of law in
bankruptcy (or in liquidation proceedings in the case of a com- pany) does not
absolve the surety of his liability.
59. The same principle is applicable to the signatory/director in the case of Section 138/141
proceedings. The signatory/director cannot take benefit of discharge obtained by the corporate
debtor by operation of law under the IBC.
60. If the argument that extinguishment of debt under Section 31 of the IBC leads to the discharge of
signatory/director under Section 138 proceedings is accepted, the same will lead to conflict in law as
laid down compared to the guarantor’s liability wherein in spite of the plan being approved, the
guarantor is held separately liable for the remaining amount. If the guarantor does not get the
benefit of extinguishment of debt under Section 31 of the IBC, then similarly for extinguishment of
debt, the signatory/di- rector cannot get any benefit. If accepted, this may lead to uncertainty in the
first Principles of law on interpretation of extinguishment of debt. In Lalit Kumar Jain (supra) this
Court held as under:
“122. It is therefore, clear that the sanction of a resolution plan and finality imparted
to it by Section 31 does not per se operate as a discharge of the guarantor's liability.
As to the nature and extent of the liability, much would depend on the terms of the
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
31
guarantee itself. However, this Court has indicated, time and again, that an
involuntary act of the principal debtor leading to loss of security, would not absolve a
guarantor of its liability. In Maharashtra SEB [Maharashtra SEB v. Official
Liquidator, (1982) 3 SCC 358] the liability of the guarantor (in a case where liability
of the principal debtor was discharged under the Insolvency law or the Company
law), was considered. It was held that in view of the unequivocal guarantee, such
liability of the guarantor continues and the creditor can realise the same from the
guarantor in view of the language of Section 128 of the Con- tract Act, 1872 as there is
no discharge under Section 134 of that Act. This Court observed as follows: (SCC pp.
362-63, para 7) “7. Under the bank guarantee in question the Bank has undertaken to
pay the Electricity Board any sum up to Rs 50,000 and in order to re- alise it all that
the Electricity Board has to do is to make a demand. Within forty-eight hours of such
demand the Bank has to pay the amount to the Electricity Board which is not under
any obligation to prove any de- fault on the part of the Company in liquidation before
the amount de- manded is paid. The Bank cannot raise the plea that it is liable only to
the extent of any loss that may have been sustained by the Electricity Board owing to
any default on the part of the supplier of goods i.e. the Com- pany in liquidation. The
liability is absolute and unconditional. The fact that the Company in liquidation i.e.
the principal debtor has gone into liq- uidation also would not have any effect on the
liability of the Bank i.e. the guarantor. Under Section 128 of the Contract Act, 1872,
the liability of the surety is coextensive with that of the principal debtor unless it is
otherwise provided by the contract. A surety is no doubt discharged un- der Section
134 of the Contract Act, 1872 by any contract between the creditor and the principal
debtor by which the principal debtor is re- leased or by any act or omission of the
creditor, the legal consequence of which is the discharge of the principal debtor. But a
discharge which the principal debtor may secure by operation of law in bankruptcy
(or in liqui-
dation proceedings in the case of a company) does not absolve the surety of his liability (see
Jagannath Ganeshram Agarwale v. Shivnarayan Bhagirath [1939 SCC OnLine Bom 65 : AIR 1940
Bom 247] ; see also Fitzgeorge, In re [Fitzgeorge, In re, (1905) 1 KB 462]).”” (Emphasis supplied)
LITIGANT CANNOT TAKE ADVANTAGE OF ITS OWN WRONG (NULLUS COMMODUM
CAPERE POTEST DE INJURIA SUA PROPRIA)
61. This Court while upholding the validity of Section 32A, IBC (Manish Kumar’s case) has held that
“The provision is carefully thought out. It is not as if the wrongdo- ers are allowed to get away.” That
is a very important object and the same should not be permitted to be defeated by accepting the
argument that permits the Signatory/Direc-
tor to enjoy the fruits of their own wrong.
62. In an interesting case titled Goa State Cooperative Bank Limited v. Krishna Nath A. and Others
reported in (2019) 20 SCC 38, the facts were that the liquidation proceedings were required to be
completed within a fixed number of years, but failed. Thereafter the borrowers claimed in the
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
32
recovery suit that now no recovery could be made. This Court held that the defaulters cannot take
benefit of their own action. The disbursement of loan in an arbitrary manner and failure to recover
was the very fulcrum on the basis of which the winding up of the Society was ordered. I quote the
relevant ob- servations as under:-
“21. It is apparent that on the termination of the liquidation proceedings, liability of
the members for the debts taken by them does not come to an end. There is no such
provision in the Act providing once winding-up period is over, the liability of the
members for loans obtained by them which is in their hands, and for which recovery
proceedings are pending shall come to an end. No automatic termination of recovery
proceedings against the members is contemplated. On the other hand, on completion
of the period fixed to liquidate the Society, final report has to be submitted as to the
amount standing to the credit of the Society in liquidation after paying off its
liabilities including the share or interest of members. Thus, even in the case of
liquidation the accountability remains towards surplus and liabilities do not come to
an end. Even if the period fixed for liquidation of Society is over, that does not
terminate the proceedings for recovery which have been initiated and appeals are
pending.
Xxx xxx xxx
24. The concept of restitution is a common law principle and it is a rem- edy against
unjust enrichment or unjust benefit. The court cannot be used as a tool by a litigant
to perpetuate illegality. A person who is on the right side of the law, should not have a
feeling that in case he is dragged in litigation, and wins, he would turn out to be a
loser and wrong- doer as a real gainer, after 20 or 30 years. Thus, the members who
have obtained stay in appeal or on recovery proceedings or the case is pending,
cannot take advantage of the fact that the period fixed for the Liquidator under the
Act is over.
25. Once a report has been submitted, the Registrar has to take action in terms of the
report and in such circumstances when the proceedings for recovery are pending
against the members and the Society has taken loan from the banks for its member,
the actual money has to go to the creditor i.e. to the bank who is going to be
benefitted by recovery of public money in the hands of members. In such cases it
would be appropriate for the Regis- trar to send notice of the proceedings to a person
who is to be benefit- ted from the recovery. In the instant case, the Bank itself is a
prime lender- cum- liquidator. The proceedings cannot come to the end. Thus, in our
con- sidered opinion, it is open to the bank to continue with the recovery pro-
ceedings and make recoveries from the defaulting members. Merely on the
liquidation of the Society, or the factum that the period fixed for liqui-
dation is over, liability of the members for the loans cannot be said to have been wiped off. The
disbursement of loan in an arbitrary manner and failure to recover was the very fulcrum on the basis
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
33
of which winding up of the Society was ordered.” (Emphasis supplied) TERMS OF THE
RESOLUTION PLAN CANNOT CONTROL THE ENACTMENT/RULES
63. Before I proceed to comment on the aforesaid, it is necessary to look into the rel- evant clauses
of the resolution plan upon which strong reliance is sought to be placed on behalf of the appellant.
The relevant clauses read thus:
“Part K: Extinguishment of Claims/Rights
1. Save and except specifically dealt with under this Resolution Plan, no other
payments or settlements (of any kind) shall be made to any other Per- son in respect
of claims filed under the CIRP (including, for the avoidance of doubt, any unverified
portion of their claim) and all claims against the Cor- porate Debtor along with any
related legal proceedings, including criminal proceedings, and other penal
proceedings, shall stand irrevocably and un-
conditionally abated, settled and extinguished in perpetuity on the Effective Date,
and with effect from the Appointed Date.
2. The payment to Persons contemplated in this Resolution Plan shall be the
Corporate Debtors and Resolution Applicant's full and final performance and
satisfaction of all its obligations to such Persons and all Claims (includ- ing, for the
avoidance of doubt, any unverified portion of their Claims) of such Persons against
the Corporate Debtor shall stand irrevocably and un- conditionally settled and
extinguished in perpetuity on the Effective Date and with effect from the Appointed
Date.
3. …Accordingly, the Resolution Applicant and the Corporate Debtor shall have no
responsibility or liability in respect of any claims against the Corporate Debtor
attributable to the period prior to the Effective Date other than any payments to be
made under this Resolution Plan and all claims along with any related legal
proceedings, including criminal proceedings and other penal proceedings, shall stand
irrevocably and unconditionally abated, settled and extinguished in perpetuity.
Xxx xxx xxx
6. On the Effective Date and with effect from the Appointed Date, all the outstanding
negotiable instruments issued by Director/promoter or Corpo- rate Debtor or by any
Person on behalf of the Corporate Debtor for any dues of Corporate Debtor including
demand promissory notes, post-dated cheques and letters of credit, shall stand
terminated and the Corporate Debtor's liability under such instruments shall stand
extinguished.” (Emphasis supplied)
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
34
64. I have referred to Section 31 of the IBC and Ebix Singapore (supra) to explain that the resolution
plan is binding on the creditors who have not consented to it. This is a very important factor, which
indicates that the complainant under Section 138 NI Act is bound by the approved resolution plan,
even though he may not have consented to it (if he is part of the CoC) or likes it. If he is not a part of
the CoC, then also it is bind- ing on him.
65. Section 30(2)(e) of the IBC requires the resolution professional to approve the resolution plan,
only if the same does not violate any of the provisions of the law for the time being in force. Thus,
the clauses of the resolution plan cannot con- trol the Enactment/Rules in force. It is the resolution
plan which has to comply with the laws in force. In the case on hand, any clause giving any effect to
the corporate debtor under Section 138 NI Act proceedings, cannot be used to protect the
signatories/direc-
tors under Section 138/141 NI Act.
66. Section 61(3)(i) of the IBC provides for an appeal against an order approving a resolution plan if
it contravenes any provision of law.
“61. Appeals and Appellate Authority.— xxx xxx xxx (3) An appeal against an order approving a
resolution plan under Sec- tion 31 may be filed on the following grounds, namely:
(i) the approved resolution plan is in contravention of the provisions of any law for the time being in
force;….”
67. The complainant-creditor of Section 138 NI Act proceedings may or may not have any role to
play in the approval of the resolution plan and majority of Section 138 creditors may be small
players unlike big financial creditors.
68. The terms of the resolution plan cannot run contrary to the enactment i.e. the IBC or any other
plenary law or rules.
69. Thus, the said clauses of the resolution plan have no role to play in answering the neat question
of law, which is dependent on the interpretation of various provi- sions of the IBC and NI Act.
70. It was also sought to be argued on behalf of the appellant that the plain reading of the clauses of
the resolution plan referred to above, would indicate that the respondent (complainant) could be
said to have compounded the offence punishable under Section 138 of the NI Act.
71. ‘Compounding’ and ‘quashing’ are not synonymous terms. In law, they have different meanings
and consequences. They arise from different situations and operate in different fields and stages.
There is no apparent legal interdependence or interlink to the extent that one could exist only if the
conditions of the other were satisfied or vice- versa. Quashing is one of the facets of inherent
powers, while compounding of an offence being a statutory expression contained under Section 320
the CrPC is entirely a different concept.
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
35
72. The expressions 'compromise' and 'compounding' are not synonyms in criminal jurisprudence
even though these expressions are usually used without any distinction.
Any dispute can be compromised between the parties if the terms are not illegal. But only a
compoundable offence allowed by law can be compounded. A dispute relating to a crime can be
compromised even before the case is registered, and in that case, victim of the crime may refuse to
file a complaint. But if in spite of compromise, if he files a complaint and court finds that what is
compromised is a compoundable offence, depending upon the facts and circumstances of each case
Magistrate can refuse to take cognizance, or acquit the accused as offence was compounded or the
complaint can be quashed in proceedings under Section 482 of the CrPC.
73. In a compromise, consensus between the parties to give and take is more important and in a
compounding, decision of the victim of the offence not to prosecute and not to continue with
prosecution is more important.
74. I am of the view that the clauses as contained in the resolution plan referred to above, only
extinguishes the liability of the corporate debtor and not the natural persons.
75. As per Section 138 of the NI Act, when the cheque was dishonoured and a statu- tory notice
demanding the cheque amount was issued, the accused shall pay the cheque amount within 15 days
from the date of receipt of the said notice. The moment the said 15 days expired, the cause of action
arises. In other words, the offence under Section 138 of the NI Act is complete. Once the cause of
action arose for the offence commit- ted, the complainant has to approach the criminal court within
one month to take penal action under Section 138 of the NI Act. To put it clearly, the complainant
approaches the criminal court not for recovery of the legally enforceable debt, but for taking penal
ac- tion under Section 138 of the NI Act for the offence already committed by the accused by not
making the payment of the cheque amount despite the receipt of the statutory no- tice. The only
question before the criminal court is whether the cheque issued by the ac- cused towards the
discharge of his liability was dishonoured and despite the service of demand notice, whether he had
not paid the amount. There is no bar contained in any of the provisions of the IBC, and the NI Act
from approaching the criminal court to seek penal action under Section 138 of the NI Act.
FEW RELEVANT DECISIONS ON THE SUBJECT
76. In State Bank of India v. V. Ramakrishnan and Another reported in (2018) 17 SCC 394, this
Court held that:-
“31. The Insolvency Law Committee, appointed by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs,
by its Report dated 26-3-2018, made certain key recommendations…..
32. The Committee insofar as the moratorium under Section 14 is concerned, went on
to find:… “5.11. Further, since many guarantees for loans of corporates are given by
its promoters in the form of personal guarantees, if there is a stay on actions against
their assets during a CIRP, such promoters (who are also corporate applicants) may
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
36
file frivolous applications to merely take advantage of the stay and guard their assets.
In the judgments analysed in this relation, many have been filed by the corporate
applicant under Section 10 of the Code and this may corroborate the above
apprehension of abuse of the moratorium provision. The Committee concluded that
Section 14 does not intend to bar actions against assets of guarantors to the debts of
the corporate debtor and recommended that an explanation to clarify this may be
inserted in Section 14 of the Code. The scope of the moratorium may be restricted to
the assets of the corporate debtor only.” Xxx xxx xxx
25. Section 31 of the Act was also strongly relied upon by the respondents. This
section only states that once a resolution plan, as approved by the Committee of
Creditors, takes effect, it shall be binding on the corporate debtor as well as the
guarantor. This is for the reason that otherwise, under Section 133 of the Contract
Act, 1872, any change made to the debt owed by the corporate debtor, without the
surety's consent, would relieve the guarantor from payment. Section 31(1), in fact,
makes it clear that the guarantor cannot escape payment as the resolution plan,
which has been approved, may well include provisions as to payments to be made by
such guarantor. This is perhaps the reason that Annexure VI(e) to Form 6 contained
in the Rules and Regulation 36(2) referred to above, require information as to
personal guarantees that have been given in relation to the debts of the corporate
debtor. Far from supporting the stand of the respondents, it is clear that in point of
fact, Section 31 is one more factor in favour of a personal guarantor having to pay for
debts due without any moratorium applying to save him.
Xxx xxx xxx 26.1. Section 14 refers only to debts due by corporate debtors, who are
limited liability companies, and it is clear that in the vast majority of cases, personal
guarantees are given by Directors who are in management of the companies. The
object of the Code is not to allow such guarantors to escape from an independent and
co-extensive liability to pay off the entire outstanding debt, which is why Section 14 is
not applied to them. …” (Emphasis supplied)
77. In Committee of Creditors of Essar Steel India Limited v. Satish Kumar Gupta and Others
reported in (2020) 8 SCC 531, this Court held that:
“106. Following this judgment in V. Ramakrishnan case (2018) 17 SCC 394, it is
difficult to accept Shri Rohatgi's argument that that part of the resolution plan which
states that the claims of the guarantor on account of subrogation shall be
extinguished, cannot be applied to the guarantees furnished by the erstwhile
Directors of the corporate debtor. So far as the present case is concerned, we hasten
to add that we are saying nothing which may affect the pending litigation on account
of invocation of these guarantees. However, NCLAT judgment being contrary to
Section 31(1) of the Code and this Court's judgment in V. Ramakrishnan case (2018)
17 SCC 394, is set aside.” (Emphasis supplied)
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
37
78. In Vijay Kumar Jain v. Standard Chartered Bank reported in (2019) 20 SCC 455, this Court held
that:
“19.3… we find that Section 31(1) of the Code would make it clear that such members
of the erstwhile Board of Directors, who are often guarantors, are vitally interested in
a resolution plan as such resolution plan then binds them. Such plan may scale down
the debt of the principal debtor, resulting in scaling down the debt of the guarantor as
well, or it may not. The resolution plan may also scale down certain debts and not
others, leaving guarantors of the latter kind of debts exposed for the entire amount of
the debt.
19.4. The regulations also make it clear that these persons are vitally interested in
resolution plans as they affect them.” (Emphasis supplied)
79. In Lalit Kumar Jain (supra), this Court held that:
“122. It is therefore, clear that the sanction of a resolution plan and finality imparted
to it by Section 31 does not per se operate as a discharge of the guarantor's liability.
As to the nature and extent of the liability, much would depend on the terms of the
guarantee itself. However, this Court has indicated, time and again, that an
involuntary act of the principal debtor leading to loss of security, would not absolve a
guarantor of its liability…..” (Emphasis supplied)
80. In JIK Industries Limited and Others v. Amarlal V. Jumani and Another reported in (2012) 3
SCC 255, this Court held that:
“19. In the instant appeal in most of the cases the offence under the NI Act has been
committed prior to the scheme. Therefore, the offence which has already been
committed prior to the scheme does not get automatically compounded only as a
result of the said scheme. Therefore, even by relying on the ratio of the aforesaid
judgment in J.K. (Bombay) (P) Ltd. [J.K. (Bombay) (P) Ltd. v. New Kaiser-I-Hind
Spg. And Wvg. Co. Ltd., AIR 1970 SC 1041], this Court cannot accept the appellant's
contention that the scheme under Section 391 of the Companies Act will have the
effect of automatically compounding the offence under the NI Act.
Xxx xxx xxx
27. The compounding of an offence is always controlled by statutory provision. There
are various features in the compounding of an offence and those features must be
satisfied before it can be claimed by the offender that the offence has been
compounded. Thus, compounding of an offence cannot be achieved indirectly by the
sanctioning of a scheme by the Company Court.
Xxx xxx xxx
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
38
70. In the instant case no special procedure has been prescribed under the NI Act
relating to compounding of an offence. In the absence of special procedure relating to
compounding, the procedure relating to compounding under Section 320 shall
automatically apply in view of clear mandate of sub-section (2) of Section 4 of the
Code.
Xxx xxx xxx
83. For the reasons aforesaid, this Court is unable to accept the contentions of the
learned counsel for the appellant(s) that as a result of sanction of a scheme under
Section 391 of the Companies Act there is an automatic compounding of offences
under Section 138 of the NI Act even without the consent of the complainant.”
(Emphasis supplied)
81. In Indorama Synthetics (I) Ltd., Nagpur v. State of Maharashtra and others reported in 2016
SCC OnLine Bom 2611, the question that arose before the Bombay High Court was whether the
expression “suit or other proceedings” mentioned in Section 446(1) of the Companies Act, 1956
would include criminal proceedings under Section 138 NI Act. It was held that:-
“17. Thus, the main object of section 138 of N.I. Act, which can be inferred, is to
safeguard the credibility of commercial transactions and to prevent bouncing of
cheques by providing a personal criminal liability against the drawer of the cheque in
public interest. No civil liability or any liability against the assets of the drawer of the
cheque is contemplated under section 138 of the N.I. Act. Hence, it follows that the
provisions of section 446(1) of the Companies Act can have apparently and in essence
no application to the proceedings under section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act,
as it is not a suit or proceeding having direct bearing on the proceedings for
winding-up or the assets of the Company.
xxx xxx xxx
24. Thus, the sum and substance of all these judicial decisions is that the provisions
of section 446(1) of the Companies Act are to be invoked judiciously only when it has
got any concern with either the winding-up proceedings or with the assets of the
Company. The expression “suit or other proceedings”, therefore, as used in section
446(1) of the Companies Act, has to be construed accordingly and not to be
interpreted so liberally and widely so as to include each and every proceeding of
whatsoever nature initiated against the Company, including even the criminal
proceedings like for the offence under section 138 of N.I. Act, which has got no
bearing on the winding-up proceedings of the Company and are not concerned with,
directly with the assets of the Company, but are mainly dealing with the penal and
personal liability of the Directors of the Company.
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
39
25. The conflict involved in the case can also be looked into from another aspect ‘as to
whether the provisions of section 138 of N.I. Act can override the provisions of
Companies Act, as it is a very special provision incorporated in the Negotiable
Instruments Act, though the Companies Act contains certain special provisions in
order to safeguard the rights of the Company under liquidation?’ Xxx xxx xxx
28. If one considers the provisions of section 138 of the N.I. Act, which are
introduced subsequently by way of amendment in the said Act, in the year 1988, it
being a subsequent Statute, it will necessarily override the provisions of General
Statute, like, the Companies Act.
Xxx xxx xxx
30. Thus, there is a long line of decisions making the position clear that the
expression ‘suit or legal proceedings’, used in section 446(1) of the Companies Act,
can mean only those proceedings which can have a bearing on the assets of the
companies in winding-up or have some relation with the issue in winding-up. It does
not mean each and every civil proceedings, which has no bearing on the winding-up
proceedings, or criminal offences where the Director of the Company is presently
liable for penal action.” (Emphasis supplied)
82. In Manish Kumar (supra), this Court upheld Section 32A of the IBC and stated thus:
“318. The first proviso in sub-section (1) declares that if there is approval of a
resolution plan under Section 31 and a prosecution has been instituted during the
CIRP against the corporate debtor, the corporate debtor will stand discharged. This
is, however, subject to the condition that the requirements in sub-section (1), which
have been elaborated by us, have been fulfilled. In other words, if under the approved
resolution plan, there is a change in the management and control of the corporate
debtor, to a person, who is not a promoter, or in the management and control of the
corporate debtor, or a related party of the corporate debtor, or the person who
acquires control or management of the corporate debtor, has neither abetted nor
conspired in the commission of the offence, then, the prosecution, if it is instituted
after the commencement of the CIRP and during its pendency, will stand discharged
against the corporate debtor. Under the second proviso to sub-section (1), however,
the designated partner in respect of the liability partnership or the officer in default,
as defined under Section 2(60) of the Companies Act, 2013, or every person, who
was, in any manner, in charge or responsible to the corporate debtor for the conduct
of its business, will continue to be liable to be prosecuted and punished for the
offence committed by the corporate debtor. This is despite the extinguishment of the
criminal liability of the corporate debtor under sub-section (1). Still further, every
person, who was associated with the corporate debtor in any manner, and, who was
directly or indirectly involved in the commission of such offence, in terms of the
report submitted and report filed by the investigating authority, will continue to be
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
40
liable to be prosecuted and punished for the offence committed by the corporate
debtor.
319. Thus, the combined reading of the various limbs of sub-section (1) would show
that while, on the one hand, the corporate debtor is freed from the liability for any
offence committed before the commencement of the CIRP, the statutory immunity
from the consequences of the commission of the offence by the corporate debtor is
not available and the criminal liability will continue to haunt the persons, who were
in charge of the assets of the corporate debtor, or who were responsible for the
conduct of its business or those who were associated with the corporate debtor in any
manner, and who were directly or indirectly involved in the commission of the
offence, and they will continue to be liable.
Xxx xxx xxx
326. We are of the clear view that no case whatsoever is made out to seek invalidation
of Section 32-A. The boundaries of this Court's jurisdiction are clear. The wisdom of
the legislation is not open to judicial review. Having regard to the object of the Code,
the experience of the working of the Code, the interests of all stakeholders including
most importantly the imperative need to attract resolution applicants who would not
shy away from offering reasonable and fair value as part of the resolution plan if the
legislature thought that immunity be granted to the corporate debtor as also its
property, it hardly furnishes a ground for this Court to interfere. The provision is
carefully thought out. It is not as if the wrongdoers are allowed to get away. They
remain liable. The extinguishment of the criminal liability of the corporate debtor is
apparently important to the new management to make a clean break with the past
and start on a clean slate. We must also not overlook the principle that the impugned
provision is part of an economic measure. The reverence courts justifiably hold such
laws in cannot but be applicable in the instant case as well. The provision deals with
reference to offences committed prior to the commencement of the CIRP. With the
admission of the application the management of the corporate debtor passes into the
hands of the interim resolution professional and thereafter into the hands of the
resolution professional subject undoubtedly to the control by the Committee of
Creditors. As far as protection afforded to the property is concerned there is clearly a
rationale behind it. Having regard to the object of the statute we hardly see any
manifest arbitrariness in the provision.
327…..Significantly every person who was associated with the corporate debtor in any
manner and who was directly or indirectly involved in the commission of the offence
in terms of the report submitted continues to be liable to be prosecuted and punished
for the offence committed by the corporate debtor.” (Emphasis supplied)
83. In P. Mohanraj (supra) Full Bench of this Court held thus:
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
41
“41. Section 32-A cannot possibly be said to throw any light on the true interpretation of Section
14(1)(a) as the reason for introducing Section 32- A had nothing whatsoever to do with any
moratorium provision. At the heart of the section is the extinguishment of criminal liability of the
corporate debtor, from the date the resolution plan has been approved by the adjudicating authority,
so that the new management may make a clean break with the past and start on a clean slate. A
moratorium provision, on the other hand, does not extinguish any liability, civil or criminal, but
only casts a shadow on proceedings already initiated and on proceedings to be initiated, which
shadow is lifted when the moratorium period comes to an end. Also, Section 32-A(1) operates only
after the moratorium comes to an end. At the heart of Section 32-A is the IBC's goal of value
maximisation and the need to obviate lower recoveries to creditors as a result of the corporate
debtor continuing to be exposed to criminal liability.
42. Unfortunately, Section 32-A is inelegantly drafted. The second proviso to Section 32-A(1) speaks
of persons who are in any manner in charge of, or responsible to the corporate debtor for the
conduct of its business or associated with the corporate debtor and who are, directly or indirectly,
involved in the commission of “such offence” i.e. the offence referred to in sub-section (1), “as per
the report submitted or complaint filed by the investigating authority …”. The report submitted here
refers to a police report under Section 173 CrPC, and complaints filed by investigating authorities
under special Acts, as opposed to private complaints. If the language of the second proviso is taken
to interpret the language of Section 32-A(1) in that the “offence committed” under Section 32-A(1)
would not include offences based upon complaints under Section 2(d) CrPC, the width of the
language would be cut down and the object of Section 32-A(1) would not be achieved as all
prosecutions emanating from private complaints would be excluded. Obviously, Section 32-A(1)
cannot be read in this fashion and clearly incudes the liability of the corporate debtor for all offences
committed prior to the commencement of the corporate insolvency resolution process. Doubtless, a
Section 138 proceeding would be included, and would, after the moratorium period comes to an end
with a resolution plan by a new management being approved by the adjudicating authority, cease to
be an offence qua the corporate debtor.
43….the expression “prosecution” in the first proviso of Section 32-A(1) refers to criminal
proceedings properly so-called either through the medium of a first information report or complaint
filed by an investigating authority or complaint and not to quasi-criminal proceedings that are
instituted under Sections 138/141 of the Negotiable Instruments Act against the corporate debtor,
the object of Section 14(1) IBC gets subserved, as does the object of Section 32-A, which does away
with criminal prosecutions in all cases against the corporate debtor, thus absolving the corporate
debtor from the same after a new management comes in.
Xxx xxx xxx
45. Section 138 contains within it the ingredients of the offence made out. The deeming provision is
important in that the legislature is cognizant of the fact that what is otherwise a civil liability is now
also deemed to be an offence, since this liability is made punishable by law. It is important to note
that the transaction spoken of is a commercial transaction between two parties which involves
payment of money for a debt or liability. The Explanation to Section 138 makes it clear that such
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
42
debt or other liability means a legally enforceable debt or other liability. Thus, a debt or other
liability barred by the law of limitation would be outside the scope of Section 138. This, coupled with
fine that may extend to twice the amount of the cheque that is payable as compensation to the
aggrieved party to cover both the amount of the cheque and the interest and costs thereupon, would
show that it is really a hybrid provision to enforce payment under a bounced cheque if it is otherwise
enforceable in civil law. Further, though the ingredients of the offence are contained in the first part
of Section 138 when the cheque is returned by the bank unpaid for the reasons given in the section,
the proviso gives an opportunity to the drawer of the cheque, stating that the drawer must fail to
make payment of the amount within 15 days of the receipt of a notice, again making it clear that the
real object of the provision is not to penalise the wrongdoer for an offence that is already made out,
but to compensate the victim.” (Emphasis supplied)
84. In Narinder Garg and Others v. Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd. and Others reported in (2022) SCC
OnLine SC 517, this Court held that:
“3. In P. Mohanraj v. Shah Brothers Ispat Private Limited, (2021) 6 SCC 258, a Bench
of three-Judges of this Court considered the matter whether a corporate entity in
respect of which moratorium had become effective could be proceeded against in
terms of Sections 138 and 141 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (“the Act” for
short).
4. A subsidiary issue was also about the liability of natural persons like a Director of
the Company. In paragraph 77 of its judgment, this Court observed that the
moratorium provisions contained in Section 14 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, 2016 would apply only to the corporate debtor and that the natural persons
mentioned in Section 141 of the Act would continue to be statutorily liable under the
provisions of the Act.
5. It is submitted by Mr. Gopal Sankaranarayanan, learned Senior Advocate that the
resolution plan having been accepted in which the dues of the original complainant
also figure, the effect of such acceptance would be to obliterate any pending trial
under Sections 138 and 141 of the Act.
6. The decision rendered in P. Mohanraj is quite clear on the point and, as such, no
interference in this petition is called for.” (Emphasis supplied)
85. Thus, the upshot of all the decisions referred to above is where the proceedings under Section
138 of the NI Act had already commenced with the Magistrate taking cognizance upon the complaint
and during the pendency, the company gets dissolved, the signatories/directors cannot escape from
their penal liability under Section 138 of the NI Act by citing its dissolution. What is dissolved, is
only the company, not the per- sonal penal liability of the accused covered under Section 141 of the
NI Act.
86. I may draw my final conclusions as under:
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
43
(a) After passing of the resolution plan under Section 31 of the IBC by the adjudi-
cating authority & in the light of the provisions of Section 32A of the IBC, the
criminal proceedings under Section 138 of the NI Act will stand terminated only in
relation to the corporate debtor if the same is taken over by a new man- agement.
(b) Section 138 proceedings in relation to the signatories/directors who are
liable/covered by the two provisos to Section 32A(1) will continue in accordance with
law.
87. In view of the aforesaid discussion, the appeal fails and is hereby dismissed.
88. The connected appeals also fail and are hereby dismissed.
89. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
………………………………………..J.
(J.B. PARDIWALA) NEW DELHI;
MARCH 15, 2023.
Ajay Kumar Radheyshyam Goenka vs Tourism Finance Corporation Of ... on 15 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75370339/
44
