Supreme Court of India
B V Seshaiah vs The State Of Telangana on 1 February, 2023
Author: Krishna Murari
Bench: Krishna Murari, B.V. Nagarathna
                                                                     REPORTABLE
                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.            OF 2023
     (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (CRL) NO.7099/2018)
B V SESHAIAH                                             ...      APPELLANT(S)
                                VERSUS
THE STATE OF TELANGANA & ANR.                             ...      RESPONDENT(S)
                                 WITH
               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.            OF 2023
     (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (CRL) NO.7100/2018)
B VAMSI KRISHNA                                      ...         APPELLANT(S)
                                VERSUS
THE STATE OF TELENGANA & ANR.                        ...         RESPONDENT(S)
                                    JUDGMENT
KRISHNA MURARI, J.
Leave Granted.
2. The present Appeals have been filed by the Appellants herein against the impugned order and
judgment dated 17.04.2018 passed by the High Court Of Judicature at Hyderabad in Criminal
Revision Case Nos. 1678/2014 and 1679/2014.
3. For the purpose of these Appeals, briefly, the facts of the present case are that on a private
complaint initiated by the Respondent No.2, proceedings under Section 138 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881 were initiated against the Appellants herein. These proceedings led to the
conviction of the Appellants by the trial court.
B V Seshaiah vs The State Of Telangana on 1 February, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122166354/
1
4. It is alleged that the Appellants, under the guise of making investments took money from
Respondent No.2 and made wrongful gain for their profits.
5. After the Appellants’ conviction, A revision was preferred by them in the High Court It is
important to note that during the course of the revision filed by the Appellants, the parties entered
into a Memorandum of Understanding to settle the dispute within themselves.
6. Clause 8 of the Memorandum Of Understanding stated that the dispute was to be settled
amicably, and in the event of the dispute still not being amicably resolved, it must be first referred to
a sole Arbitrator. Clause 8 of the said Memorandum Of Understanding is as under:-
“That any dispute under this document shall be resolved amicably. In the event the
dispute is not resolved amicably, the matter shall be referred to the sole arbitration of
Shri Jonnalagadda Srinivasa Rao S/o Venkaiah whose decision shall be final and
binding on all the parties. On entering reference, the sole arbitrator shall hear the
parties and pass award. The provisions of arbitration and conciliation act shall apply
to the arbitration proceedings. The place of arbitration shall be Ongole only.
7. It is also to be noted that as per the terms of the agreement, the Respondent No.2
was bound to file a compromise petition before the High Court, however he failed to
do so. The lack of filing of such a compromise petition, as agreed upon by the
Respondent No.2, has now led to the High Court dismissing the Revision and
confirming the Conviction of the Appellants.
8. In our view, the terms and conditions of the settlement entered into by the parties
binds them to settle the dispute amicably, or through an arbitration as has been
stated in clause 8 of the Memorandum Of Understanding.
9. In such a circumstance, the Appellants cannot be convicted on the basis of the
orders passed by the courts below, as the settlement is nothing but a compounding of
the offence.
10. In the case of M/S Meters and Instruments Private Limited & Anr. Vs Kanchan Mehta1,this
court held that the nature of offence under section 138 of the N.I Act is primarily related to a civil
wrong and has been specifically 1 2018 (1) SCC 560 made a compoundable offence. The relevant
paragraph of the judgment has been extracted herein:
“This Court has noted that the object of the statute was to facilitate smooth
functioning of business transactions. The provision is necessary as in many
transactions’ cheques were issued merely as a device to defraud the creditors.
Dishonor of cheque causes incalculable loss, injury and inconvenience to the Vide the
Banking, Public Financial Institutions and Negotiable Instruments Laws
(Amendment) Act, 1988 payee and credibility of business transactions suffers a
setback. At the same time, it was also noted that nature of offence under Section 138
B V Seshaiah vs The State Of Telangana on 1 February, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122166354/
2
primarily related to a civil wrong and the 2002 amendment specifically made it
compoundable.”
11. This is a very clear case of the parties entering into an agreement and compounding the offence
to save themselves from the process of litigation. When such a step has been taken by the parties,
and the law very clearly allows them to do the same, the High Court then cannot override such
compounding and impose its will.
12. It must also be noted that the Respondent No.2 was duty bound to file a compromise petition
before the High Court, and by not doing the same has withdrawn key information from the High
Court, which has led to an unwarranted confirmation of the Appellants’ conviction.
13. We, therefore, allow these Appeals and set aside the order of conviction passed by the trial court.
It is, however, kept open to the parties to settle their dispute as per the terms of the Memorandum
Of Understanding.
.......................J.
(KRISHNA MURARI) .......................J.
(V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN) NEW DELHI;
01st February, 2023
B V Seshaiah vs The State Of Telangana on 1 February, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122166354/
3
