Supreme Court of India
C.M.D.,City Union Bank Limited . vs R.Chandramohan on 27 March, 2023
Author: Hon'Ble Ms. Trivedi
Bench: Ajay Rastogi, Hon'Ble Ms. Trivedi
                                                                           REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7289 OF 2009
                THE CHAIRMAN & MANAGING DIRECTOR,
                CITY UNION BANK LTD. & ANR.                           .....APPELLANTS
                                                   VERSUS
                      R. CHANDRAMOHAN                                  .....RESPONDENT
                                               JUDGMENT
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.
1. The appellants – the Chairman and the Manager of the City Union Bank Limited have preferred
the present appeal against the Judgment and Order dated 01.02.2007 passed by the National
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Circuit Bench at Chennai (hereinafter referred to as the
‘National Commission’) in First Appeal No. 29 of 2005 arising out of the Judgment and Order dated
23.12.2004 passed by the State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Chennai in O.P. No.
103/99.
2. The short facts giving rise to the present appeal are that the Signature Not Verified respondent -
original complainant Mr. R. Chandramohan had filed Digitally signed by Jayant Kumar Arora Date:
2023.03.27 17:05:57 IST Reason:
the complaint being O.P. No. 103/99 against the appellants – original opponents before the State
Commission seeking direction against the appellants to re-credit rupees eight lakhs covering two
demand drafts - one bearing No. 166570 dated 28.06.1996 for rupees five lakhs and the other
bearing No. 177923 dated 18.11.1996 for rupees three lakhs in his Current Account No. 3600. It was
alleged in the complaint inter alia that the respondent- complainant was the Managing Director of
“D-Cube Constructions (P) Ltd.” having its registered office at Chennai. Shri R. Thulasiram and Shri
R. Murali were the other directors of the said Company. As per the further case of the respondent, a
Current Account bearing No. 3600 was opened in the name of the said company with the
appellants’- bank on 13.04.1995 and the respondent alone was permitted to operate the said
account. During the end of 1996, there was misunderstanding between the respondent and one R.
Kularaireman and, therefore, he had written a letter to the appellant no. 2 on 08.01.1997 requesting
it not to allow withdrawals from the said current account. It was further case of the respondent that
one Ravindra, an NRI residing at Malaysia had purchased three flats in the respondent’s projects
and had informed the complainant that he had sent two drafts i.e., draft bearing No. 166570 dated
C.M.D.,City Union Bank Limited . vs R.Chandramohan on 27 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151182343/
1
28.06.1996 for Rs. 5 lakhs and draft bearing no. 177923 dated 18.11.1996 for Rs. 3 lakhs, totally
amounting to Rs. 8 lakhs. On the reconciliation of the accounts, it was found that the said two
demand drafts were not credited in the said current account of the company opened with the
appellant no. 2 - bank. Despite the information sought by the respondent- complainant, the
appellant no. 2 did not furnish any information. Subsequently, the respondent came to know
through Indian Overseas Bank that the said demand drafts were presented through the second
appellant bank for clearing and the same were paid to the City Union Bank, Ram Nagar Branch. The
respondent therefore once again requested the appellant no. 2 on 03.08.1998 informing it that the
amount of the said two drafts were credited in some other accounts and therefore the same be
re-credited in his current account.
3. Thereafter, correspondence ensued between the appellants and the respondent and it was found
that a separate account in the name of “D-Cube Construction” was opened and the said two drafts
were credited in that account, as the said demand drafts were in the name of “D-Cube
Construction”. The respondent alleging collusion and negligence on the part of the appellants filed
the complaint before the State Commission.
4. The State Commission allowing the said complaint with cost of Rs.
1,000/- directed the appellants-original opponents to pay the respondent-complainant a sum of Rs.
Eight lakhs along with compensation of Rs. one lakh towards mental agony, loss and hardship.
Being aggrieved by the said order, the appellants had preferred the First Appeal being 29/2005,
which came to be dismissed by the National Commission vide the impugned order.
5. The learned counsel appearing for the appellants submitted that the State Commission and the
National Commission had committed an error in not appreciating the fact that in absence of any
fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in the performance, which was required to be
maintained by the appellants’ bank, it could not be presumed that there was deficiency in service as
defined under Section 2(1)(g) of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (hereinafter referred to as the
‘said Act’) He has relied upon the decision of this Court in case of Ravneet Singh Bagga vs. KLM
Royal Dutch Airlines and Another1 and in case of Branch Manager, Indigo Airlines Kolkata and
Another Vs. Kalpana Rani Debbarma and Others 2 to submit that the complaint filed by the
respondent-complainant was not maintainable before the State Commission, and even otherwise the
respondent had failed to discharge the burden of proof that there was deficiency in service on the
part of the appellants. He further submitted that the two demand drafts in question were issued in
the name of “D-Cube Construction” only, 1 (2000) 1 SCC 66 2 (2020) 9 SCC 424 and it was on the
instructions of R. Thulasiram one of the Co-
directors, the amounts of the said drafts were credited in the Current Account No.
4160 opened in the name of “D-Cube Construction”. According to him, as per the
letter dated 15.02.1997 addressed to the appellant-bank by the “D-Cube
Constructions (P) Ltd.”, stating that the said Company had no objection if current
account in the name of “D-Cube Construction” was opened, the said account was
opened by Shri R. Thulasiram in his capacity as the proprietor of the proprietary
C.M.D.,City Union Bank Limited . vs R.Chandramohan on 27 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151182343/
2
concern. According to him, if any fraud was committed by the Co-director of the
“D-Cube Constructions (P) Ltd.”, such disputes pertains to fraud would not fall
within the jurisdiction of the State Commission or the National Commission to
decide.
6. However, learned counsel for the respondent-complainant submitted that when the two forums
have consistently held the appellants liable for the deficiency in service, this Court should not
interfere with the same. He further submitted that the bank would be vicariously liable for the acts
of its employees. As per the General Banking Principles and Guidelines laid down by the RBI, the
account should not have been opened with the similar name of the company of which the
complainant was the Managing Director. According to him, without the involvement of the officers
of the Bank, R. Thulasiram would not have encashed the drafts in question by opening a new current
account in the name of “D- Cube Construction”. He further submitted that there was a clear
deficiency in service on the part of the appellant -bank. In this regard he had relied upon the
decision in case of Kerala State Cooperative Marketing Federation Vs. State Bank of India and
Others3 and in case of Indian Overseas Bank vs. Industrial Chain Concern4.
7. Having regard to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and to the
documents on record, the question that falls for consideration before this Court would be, whether
the Commission/Forum under the Act could have entertained the complaint involving highly
disputed questions of facts or involving allegations of tortious acts, the proceedings before the
Commission/Forum being summary in nature?
8. In the instant case, it is not disputed that three drafts were issued by an NRI from Malaysia for
the purchase of three flats. Out of three, one draft was for the sum of Rs. 5 lakhs dated 28.06.1996
and two drafts were for Rs. 3 lakhs & Rs. 6 lakhs dated 18.11.1996. It is also not disputed that the
two drafts in question were issued in the name of “D-Cube Construction” and not in the name of
“D-Cube Constructions (P) Ltd.” The Current Account No. 3 (2004) 2 SCC 425 4 (1990) 1 SCC 484
3600 was in the name of “D-Cube Constructions (P) Ltd.”, whereas the Current Account No. 4160
was opened on 15.02.1997 in the name of “D-Cube Construction” by Shri R. Thulasiram, as the
proprietor of his proprietary concern, when he was one of the Directors of “D-Cube Constructions
(P) Ltd.” It is also not disputed that appellant no. 2 - bank had received a letter dated 15.02.1997
from the “D-Cube Constructions (P) Ltd.” giving “no objection” for opening the current account in
the name of “D-Cube Construction”. It is also not disputed that there were certain disputes going on
between the Directors of the said company - “D-Cube Constructions (P) Ltd.”.
9. Under the circumstances, when the Current Account No. 4160 was opened by R. Thulasiram as
the proprietor of “D-Cube Construction”, relying upon the letter dated 15.02.1997 written on behalf
of the “D-Cube Constructions (P) Ltd.”, and when the disputed two drafts in question which were in
the name of “D-Cube Construction”, were credited in the account of “D-Cube Construction”, it could
not be said that there was any willful default or imperfection or short coming so as to term it as the
deficiency in service on the part of the appellant-bank within the meaning of Section 2(g) of the said
Act. The counsel for the appellants has rightly relied upon the decision of this Court in case of
Ravneet Singh Bagga (supra) as under:
C.M.D.,City Union Bank Limited . vs R.Chandramohan on 27 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151182343/
3
“5. Section 2(i)(o) defines “service” to mean service of any description which is made
available to potential users and includes the provision of facilities in connection with
banking, financing, insurance, transport, processing, supply of electrical or other
energy, board or lodging or both, entertainment, amusement or the purveying of
news or other information, but does not include the rendering of any service free of
charge or under a contract of personal service. Section 2(i)(g) defines “deficiency” to
mean any fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in the quality, nature and
manner of performance which is required to be maintained by or under any law for
the time being in force or has been undertaken to be performed by a person in
pursuance of a contract or otherwise in relation to any service”.
“6. The deficiency in service cannot be alleged without attributing fault, imperfection,
shortcoming or inadequacy in the quality, nature and manner of performance which
is required to be performed by a person in pursuance of a contract or otherwise in
relation to any service. The burden of proving the deficiency in service is upon the
person who alleges it.
The complainant has, on facts, been found to have not established any wilful fault, imperfection,
shortcoming or inadequacy in the service of the respondent. The deficiency in service has to be
distinguished from the tortious acts of the respondent. In the absence of deficiency in service the
aggrieved person may have a remedy under the common law to file a suit for damages but cannot
insist for grant of relief under the Act for the alleged acts of commission and omission attributable
to the respondent which otherwise do not amount to deficiency in service. In case of bona fide
disputes no wilful fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in the quality, nature and manner
of performance in the service can be informed (sic). If on facts it is found that the person or
authority rendering service had taken all precautions and considered all relevant facts and
circumstances during the transaction and that their action or the final decision was in good faith, it
cannot be said that there had been any deficiency in service. If the action of the respondent is found
to be in good faith, there is no deficiency of service entitling the aggrieved person to claim relief
under the Act. The rendering of deficient service has to be considered and decided in each case
according to the facts of that case for which no hard and fast rule can be laid down. Inefficiency, lack
of due care, absence of bona fides, rashness, haste or omission and the like may be the factors to
ascertain the deficiency in rendering the service”
10. The ratio of the aforestated decision has also been followed in case of Branch Manager, Indigo
Airlines Kolkata (supra). In Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. vs. Munimahesh Patel 5, this Court held that
the proceedings before the Commission are essentially summary in nature and the issues which
involve disputed factual questions, should not be adjudicated by the Commission.
11. So far as the facts of the present case are concerned, even if the allegations made in the complaint
are taken on their face value, then also it clearly emerges that there was no wilful fault, imperfection,
shortcoming or inadequacy in the discharge of the 5 (2006) 7 SCC 655 duty on the part of the
employees of the appellants’ bank, which could be termed as “deficiency in service” under Section
2(1)(g) of the said Act. As emerging from the record, some disputes were going on amongst the
C.M.D.,City Union Bank Limited . vs R.Chandramohan on 27 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151182343/
4
Directors of the Company and one of the Directors, if allegedly had committed fraud or cheating, the
employees of the bank could not be held liable, if they had acted bona fide and followed the due
procedure.
12. The proceedings before the Commission being summary in nature, the complaints involving
highly disputed questions of facts or the cases involving tortious acts or criminality like fraud or
cheating, could not be decided by the Forum/Commission under the said Act. The “deficiency in
service”, as well settled, has to be distinguished from the criminal acts or tortious acts. There could
not be any presumption with regard to the wilful fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in
the quality, nature and manner of performance in service, as contemplated in Section 2(1)(g) of the
Act. The burden of proving the deficiency in service would always be upon the person alleging it.
13. In the instant case, respondent-complainant having miserably failed to discharge his burden to
prove that there was a deficiency in service on the part of the employees of the appellants-bank
within the meaning of Section 2(1)(g) of the Act, his complaint deserved to be dismissed, and is
accordingly dismissed. The impugned orders passed by the State Commission and the National
Commission are therefore quashed and set aside. The appeal stands allowed accordingly.
..………………………. J.
[AJAY RASTOGI] ..................................J.
[BELA M. TRIVEDI] NEW DELHI;
27.03.2023
C.M.D.,City Union Bank Limited . vs R.Chandramohan on 27 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151182343/
5
