Delhi High Court
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
                          $~81
                          *      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                                               RESERVED ON -8th May, 202
                          %                                 PRONOUNCED ON -30th May,2023
                          +       CRL.M.C. 6544/2022, CRL.M.A. 25503/2022
                                 CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGTATION                  .....
                                                 Through:   Mr. Anupam S. Sharma, SPP-CB
                                                            and Mr. R. A. Yadav, ASP-CBI
                                                            Mr. Prakarsh Airan, Ms. Harp
                                                            Kaisi, Mr. Abhishek Batra an
                                                            Ripudaman Sharma, Advocates.
                                                 versus
                                 KAPIL WADHAWAN & ANR.                             .....
                                                 Through:   Ms. Rebecca John, Senior Adv
                                                            with   Mr.     Rohan      Da
                                                            Prakhar Parekh, Ms. Deepa Mr
                                                            Ashish Hira and Mr. Archit J
                                                            Advocates for R-1.
                                                            Mr. Amit Desai, Senior Advoc
                                                            through      V/c   with     
                                                            Dakshini, Mr. Prakhar Parekh
                                                            Deepa Mr. Ashish Hira and Mr
                                                            Archit Jain, Advocates for R
                          CRL.M.C. 6544/2022                                            
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:RAJ
BALA
Signing Date:30.05.2023
17:25:55
                           CORAM:
                          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE DINESH KUMAR SHARMA
                                                    JUDGMENT
DINESH KUMAR SHARMA,J :
Preface
1. This is a petition under sections 482 r/w 439 (2) Cr.P.C moved on behalf of petitioner CBI seeking
quashing and/or cancellation of order dated 03.12.2022 passed by Ld. Spl. Judge, P.C. Act, Rouse
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
1
Avenue District Courts, New Delhi, whereby the respondents no. 1 & 2 have been granted default
bail under Section 167 (2) Cr.P.C.
2. Allegations in brief are that M/s Dewan Housing Finance Corporation Ltd. (hereinafter referred
to as DHFL), Kapil Wadhawan, the then Chairman & MD of DHFL, Dheeraj Wadhawan, Director of
DHFL, Shri Sudhakar Shetty, M/s Amaryllis Realtors LLP (ARLLP), M/s Gulmarg Realtors LLP
(GRLLP), M/s Skylark Buildcon Pvt. Ltd., M/s Darshan Developers Pvt. Ltd., M/s Sigtia
Constructions Pvt. Ltd., M/s Creatoz Builders Pvt. Ltd., M/s Township Developers Pvt. Ltd., M/s
Shishir Reality Pvt. Ltd., M/s Sunblink Real Estate Pvt. Ltd. and other unknown persons including
public servants, entered into a criminal conspiracy thereby cheating and inducing a consortium of 17
banks led by Union Bank of India (UBI) to sanction huge loans aggregating to Rs. 42,000 Crores
approx. The respondents accused siphoned off, and misappropriated a significant portion of the said
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 funds by
falsifying the books of account of DHFL and deliberately and dishonestly defaulted on repayment of
the legitimate dues, thereby causing a wrongful loss of Rs. 34,000 Crores approx. to the consortium
lenders during the periods January, 2010 to December, 2019.
3. Basis the said allegations, the present FIR- RC 2242022A0001 u/s 120B, 409, 420, 477A of IPC,
13(2) r/w 13(1)(d) of PC Act, 1988 (as amended in 2018) was registered by the Petitioner CBI,
AC-VI/SIT, New Delhi on 20.06.2022 against fourteen persons/entities including M/s Dewan
Housing Finance Corporation Limited (DHFL), its Chairman cum MD namely Kapil Wadhawan
who is respondent No.1 herein and its director at the relevant time namely Dheeraj Wadhawan
respondent No. 2 herein and certain others. Respondents Kapil Wadhawan and Dheeraj Wadhawan
were formally arrested by the Petitioner-CBI in connection with the instant case on 19.07.2022.
Thereafter, respondents Kapil and Dheeraj Wadhawan were remanded to JC on 30.07.2022.
4. Subsequently, chargesheet u/s 173 Cr.P.C. was filed before the Ld. Special Judge (CBI), New Delhi
on 15.10.2022 against eighteen individuals including Respondents and fifty-seven
companies/entities for commission of offences punishable u/s 120B r/w 206, 409, 411, 420, 424,
465, 468 & 477A of IPC and u/s 13(2) r/w 13(1)(d) of PC Act, 1988 and substantive offences thereof.
The chargesheet was filed within the expiry of the stipulated time of 90 days.
5. However, as per the chargesheet itself, further investigation u/s 173 (8) Cr.P.C. with regards to
ascertaining roles of certain persons and Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA
Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 entities who were mentioned in the FIR and other connected
issues were still continuing. Para 66 of the chargesheet reads as under:
"With regard to ascertaining roles of remaining FIR named accused persons namely
Sh. Sudhakar Shetty, M/s Amaryllis Realtors & M/s Gulmarg Realtors, remaining
CAs (who had audited balance sheets of e-DHFL & Shell companies and who had
facilitated the promoters), ultimate beneficiaries/end use of diverted funds through
shell companies & other Wadhawan Group Companies, the DHFL officials, insider
share trading of DHFL shares, bank officials, NHB officials and other connected
issues, further investigation u/s 173 (8) of Cr. PC is continuing. List of additional
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
2
witnesses and additional documents will be filed as and when required."
6. Respondents Kapil Wadhawan and Dheeraj Wadhawan filed an application u/s 167 (2) Cr. PC
before the Court of Ld. Special Judge, CBI-08, RAC, New Delhi on 29.10.2022.
7. Vide order dated 26.11.2022, the Ld. Special Judge, (PC Act) CBI-08, New Delhi, took cognizance
of the offences against all charge-sheeted seventy-five accused persons/entities including
Respondents.
8. Vide impugned order dated 03.12.2022, the Ld. Special Judge (PC Act) granted statutory bail
under Section 167 (2) Cr.P.C to the Respondent nos. 1 and 2 holding that the chargesheet filed
although within stipulated time is incomplete and hence Respondents were entitled to mandatory
bail as per law. The relevant excerpt of the impugned order reads as under:
"40) The proposition advanced on behalf of CBI that when chargesheet is already
filed and court has taken cognizance upon the same, then no relief of statutory bail
can be granted to accused as provisions of Section 167 (2) Cr.P.C. applies to pre
cognizance stage and not to post cognizance stage. However, Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 this rule applies
only when the investigation is complete and then chargesheet is filed. Filing of
incomplete chargesheet cannot deprive the accused to the statutory bail. No doubt,
this application was moved by the accused persons after filing of the chargesheet but
when the chargesheet filed is not disclosing complete investigation, then this
application is still maintainable. Plea taken by CBI that investigation qua the present
accused persons is fully completed is not acceptable due to reasons already given
above. Taking of cognizance on the chargesheet is not a ground to reject this
application when on the face of it is found incomplete and number of other offences
which the present accused persons have also on the face of it are committed is not
clear.
41) Had the discussions taken place on merits of the case, then keeping in view the
gravity and seriousness of the case perhaps accused persons might not be entitled to
any bail but this court is compelled to release them under statutory law from custody
by giving mandatory concession of default bail due to incomplete chargesheet. CBI
cannot be entirely blamed for filing incomplete chargesheet because it was not
humanly possible and was also practically very difficult to complete the very big
investigation task within a period of 90 days especially when the accused persons
themselves took several years altogether to complete the offences. It could not have
been expected from CBI to unearth each and every accused, find out every comer of
conspiracy, collect entire evidence and trace out the huge embezzled amount etc.
within such short period of 90days when some part of the investigation has to take
place out of country also. Legislation wants that if the chargesheet is not filed within
the period of 60/90 days from the date of arrest of accused person as the case may be
and if it is filed but is not complete, then the accused gets an indefeasible right to be
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
3
released on bail without any discussion on merits.
42. The court is not blaming investigating agency for any lapse, intentional delay, lethargy,
negligence and for not doing its homework before filing chargesheet, if the practical difficulties
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 of it and
fact of shortage of time are taken into consideration. Otherwise also, investigating officers are
human being and it will be highly unreasonable to expect from them to work for entire 24 x 7 days
and to run from one place to another without any break. There may be some highly remote intention
on the part of the investigating agency to deprive the benefit of statutory bail to the accused persons
but apparently chargesheet was filed with intention to disclose the labour and hard work done by
CBI officials so far in a very short period of90 days which they could do with their sincere and best
efforts. Unfortunately, the chargesheet filed is found incomplete qua various aspects already
discussed above even for these two accused though this court is satisfied with the work already done
and labour already put on the job by CBI so far. Grant of this statutory bail without discussing any
merits of case to accused person may be some setback to CBI but it is informed by Counsel for CBI
that despite such default bail, accused persons will not come out of jail as they are still confined in
other different cases in different states. Bye-passing of mandatory provisions of Section 167 (2)
Cr.P.C. through incomplete chargesheet is not permissible under law but in some situations where
offence is highly serious and heinous in nature, investigation spread over to different states and out
of country and is of big magnitude as well as when economy of the county is at stake, then this
maximum period of 60/90 days needed to be increased by the legislature through necessary
amendments in the law as per my view besides giving some additional powers to court to extend the
period to complete the investigation in such situations. In view of the above facts and circumstances,
both the accused persons are entitled to statutory bail u/s 167 (2) Cr.P.C......."
9. Aggrieved thus, the petitioner CBI, has impugned the said order as the Ld. Spl. Judge granted
default bail to respondents herein without appreciating the correct standpoint of law. CBI has
primarily challenged the said order on the ground that the right to claim default Signature Not
Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 bail u/s 167(2) Cr.P.C.
can be invoked only if the chargesheet is not filed within the stipulated time. However once
chargesheet is filed, the accused is no longer entitled to default bail under Section 167 Cr.P.C. It is
also the contention of Petitioner CBI that moreover, a chargesheet is a final report within the
meaning of Section 173(2) Cr.P.C. if the same is filed so as to enable the Court to apply its judicial
mind as to whether cognizance of the offence thereupon should be taken or not. The petitioner thus
contends that the chargesheet in the present case was complete and the respondents were not
entitled to default bail. Hence the present petition.
Background Facts:
10. The present FIR No. RC2242022A0001 was lodged pursuant to a written complaint by the DGM
of Union Bank of India on behalf of a consortium of 17 banks against Diwan Housing Finance
Corporation Ltd. (DHFL), the respondents and certain other officials. However, since DHFL enjoys
immunity granted by the NCLT under specific provisions of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, it
has not been charge sheeted.
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
4
11. The primary culprits, namely the Chairman and Managing Director of DHFL, along with a
Director, who are the respondents herein, are alleged to be the main orchestrators of the various
offenses. They exercised complete financial control over DHFL, including the management of bank
loans and public deposits.
12. Allegedly, in a coordinated conspiracy, the accused persons deceitfully diverted approximately
Rs. 34,926.77 crores from DHFL Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing
Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 by engaging in forgery, cheating, criminal breach of trust, and
falsification of accounts. They established 87 Shell Companies to siphon off funds, executing
fictitious transactions while disregarding standard lending norms and security requirements.
13. Allegedly the disbursed loan amounts, obtained from various banks, were ostensibly intended for
construction of buildings, but instead, they were funnelled towards fictitious individuals and Shell
Companies. Additionally, the funds were used for investments in shares, debentures, and securities
linked to DHFL's promoters. Guidelines set forth by RBI and the National Housing Board were
wilfully ignored. Detailed audit reports demonstrate the misuse and misappropriation of the
borrowed funds.
14. Allegedly the main accused individuals formed 87 Shell Companies under the names of their
employees, associates, and friends, through which they funnelled DHFL's funds. Most of these
companies are now defunct and deregistered at the Registrar of Companies. The fraudulent
disbursements were facilitated through a fictitious branch known as 'Bandra branch-001,' which was
non-existent and created only virtually with the code name. The software Fox Pro used in the system
of DHFL was manipulated to generate fictitious small retail home loan customers, to falsify
accounts, to forge documents, and to produce dummy data.
15. Allegedly the embezzled funds were also extensively misused for personal expenses, including
the purchase of jewellery and watches amounting to Rs. 174 crores, expensive paintings valued at
Rs. 63 crores, credit card payments, foreign trips, chartered plane expenses, Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 as well as repayment of personal
and marketing borrowings. Moreover, a substantial investment of Rs. 9 crores was made to acquire
shares in a helicopter. Enormous amounts were transferred to overseas companies from the
accounts of the fictitious Bandra Books entities. The chargesheet provides details about the specific
Shell Companies, their directors, associates, and employees involved in the illegal retention bonus
scheme, wherein they received illicit payments in collaboration with the main accused. Additionally,
the chargesheet identifies officials who hindered internal audits, suppressed vital account
information of DHFL, and facilitated the deletion of negative audit observations.
16. The chargesheet further alleges that certain Chartered Accountant (CA) firms engaged by the
accused individuals provided false certificates and fabricated audit reports to deceive the lending
banks. Data, monthly returns and audit reports submitted to NHB were also found to contain
inaccurate data. The chargesheet includes numerous facts and circumstances outlining the modus
operandi employed by the accused, encompassing offenses such as cheating, forgery, criminal
misappropriation of funds, falsification of accounts, destruction of evidence, and criminal
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
5
misconduct under the Prevention of Corruption Act.
17. Admittedly, further investigation by the CBI is ongoing and encompasses the remaining accused
individuals, officials associated with Shell companies who facilitated the DHFL promoters, insider
share trading by the respondents herein, the involvement of NHB and bank officials, as well as other
aspects of the extensive and separate Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing
Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 conspiracy. Additionally, overseas investigation also has to carried out to
trace the trail of DHFL's funds. It has been submitted that the chargesheet reveals that the
respondents herein were the masterminds acting as the main conspirators and culprits behind all
the offences, and were primarily involved in criminal activities between 2010 and 2019.
18. Contentions on behalf of the petitioner CBI I. On the issue of law regarding grant of mandatory
bail u/s 167(2) Cr.P.C.
a) Ld. SPP for the petitioner CBI submits that the right to claim default bail u/s 167(2) Cr.P.C. can
be invoked only if the chargesheet is not filed. Once chargesheet is filed, the custody of an accused is
not governed by the provision of Section 167 Cr.P.C. but under different provisions of Cr.P.C. Ld.
SPP has relied on the judgements in Sanjay Dutt v State Through CBI, (1994) 5 SCC 410; Uday
Mohanlal Acharya v. State of Maharashtra, 2001 Cri.L.J. 1832.
b) Ld. SPP submits that it is settled law that the investigating agency even subsequent to the filing of
chargesheet is empowered to conduct further investigation u/s 173(8) Cr.P.C. Both amendments to
section 167 Cr.P.C. regarding statutory bail, as well as to section 173 (8) Cr.P.C. regarding further
investigation were brought into the Cr.P.C. 1973 which did not exist in the earlier Cr.P.C. 1898. Ld.
SPP has referred to the judgement dated 27.03.2023 in Crl.A Nos. 701-702 of 2020 titled
Enforcement Directorate v Kapil Wadhawan and Ors. relied upon by Respondents to buttress this
contention.
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55
c) Ld. SPP submits that the chargesheet is a final report within the meaning of Section 173 (2)
Cr.P.C. if it is filed so as to enable the Court to apply its mind as to whether cognizance of the offence
should be taken or not. Ld. SPP has referred to the judgement in Dinesh Dalmia v CBI, 2008 Cri.
L.J.337.
d) It has been submitted that a similar view has been adopted in Abdul Azeez P.V. v National
Investigation Agency, 2014 AIR SCW 6537; Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy v CBI, 2013 AIR SCW 2800;
Akash & Ors. v State of Maharashtra &Ors., Crl. A No. 429 of 2021 decided on 21.02.2022.
e) Ld. SPP further submits that the meaning of an incomplete chargesheet was explained by a Full
Bench of the Hon€ble Supreme Court in State of Maharashtra v Sharad Vinayak Dogre & Ors., AIR
1995 SC 231, whereby it was held that the purpose of submission of the police report with the details
mentioned in sub-section (2) of Section 173 is to enable the Magistrate to satisfy himself, whether on
the basis of the report and the material filed along with the police report, a case for taking
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
6
cognizance has been made out or not. After applying his mind to the police report and the material
submitted therewith, if the Magistrate is satisfied that cognizance of the offence is required to be
taken, he shall proceed further in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The court held that section 190(1)(b) CrPC provides that a Magistrate has the power to take
cognizance upon a police report of such facts as are provided therein, on being satisfied that the case
is a fit one for taking cognizance of the offence. Therefore, if the police report and the Signature Not
Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 material filed therewith is
sufficient to satisfy the Magistrate that he should take cognizance, his power is not fettered by the
label which the investigating agency chooses to give to the report submitted by it under Section
173(2) CrPC. It was held that merely, because the prosecution had filed an application, after
submission of the charge- sheet, seeking permission to file "supplementary charge-sheet", it could
not affect the jurisdiction of the Magistrate to take cognizance, if he was otherwise satisfied from the
material placed before him along with the charge-sheet that cognizance of the offence was required
to be taken. It is the jurisdiction of the Magistrate and Magistrate alone to decide whether the
material placed by the prosecution with the report (charge-sheet) was sufficient to take cognizance
or not. The Apex court held that the power of the Magistrate to take cognizance cannot be controlled
by the investigating agency, whose duty is only to investigate and place the facts and the evidence
before the Magistrate. In the said case the High Court quashed the order only because it was
influenced by the application filed by the prosecution seeking permission to record additional
evidence and file a "supplementary charge-sheet" and from that it inferred that the report filed by
the prosecution was 'incomplete'. It was held that it cannot be said if the investigating officer terms a
police report as 'incomplete', it takes away the jurisdiction of the Magistrate to take cognizance of
the offence, even if in the opinion of the Magistrate, the material is sufficient for him to be satisfied
that it was a fit case for him to take cognizance of the offence. The Magistrate is not bound by the
label given to the report Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing
Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 or the charge-sheet by the investigating officer and it is for him to decide
whether the report and the material on which it is based, is sufficient for him to take cognizance or
not.
f) Ld. SPP thus contends that once chargesheet has been filed within the stipulated time, right of
accused to statutory bail would come to an end. It has been submitted that filing of chargesheet
would be sufficient compliance of provisions of Section 167(2) Cr.P.C. Ld. SPP has relied upon the
judgements in SFIO v Rahul Modi, AIR 2022 SC 902; Narendra K. Amin v CBI, 2015 Cri.L.J. 1334;
Suresh Kumar Bikamchand Jain v State of Maharasthra, 2013 Cri.L.J. 1625, to support this
contention.
g) Ld. SPP has further drawn the attention of this Court to a judgement of this Court in Chitra
Ramakrishna v CBI, 2022 SCC OnLine Del 3124, which has been relied upon by Respondents, to say
that even in the said case it has been held that chargesheet can be said to be complete when it
enables the Court whether to take or not to take cognizance of the offence and if certain facets call
for further investigation it would not render such report other than a final report. In the said case it
was observed that even if the police report is termed as incomplete by the investigating officer, the
power of a Magistrate to take cognizance would not be lost. The said judgement was upheld by the
Hon€ble Apex Court in CBI vs Chitra Ramakrishna vide order dated 13.02.2023 in SLP (Crl) Nos.
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
7
1550-1552 of 2023.
h) Ld. SPP submits that thus, it is immaterial whether the Court has taken cognizance or not, what is
material is that investigating officer has been able to procure sufficient material for the trial of
„accused€ Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55
by the court. Ld. SPP has referred to the judgement in Crl. A Nos. 1011-1012 of 2023 titled Judgebir
Singh @ Jasbir & Ors. v. NIA relied upon by the Respondents.
i) It has been submitted that in Dalmia (supra), the Hon€ble Apex Court held that a chargesheet is
final if is it sufficient for the court to apply its mind whether cognizance should be taken or not. It
was further held that one of the requirements for submission of a police report is whether „any
offence€ appears to have been committed and if so, by whom. Ld. SPP submits that in the present
case, since upon investigation, offences mentioned therein appeared to have been committed, report
u/s 173 Cr.P.C. was filed qua Respondents and other accused/entities whereby vide order dated
26.11.2021 the Ld. Special Judge took cognizance. Ld. SPP submits that a reference was also made in
Dalmia (supra) to K Veerswami v Union of India & Ors. (1991) 3 SCC 655, wherein it was observed
that a report under section 173 (2) Cr.P.C. is an intimation to the Magistrate that investigating
officer has procured sufficient evidence for trial of an accused by the Court and as such, it is not
important whether evidence would be added later or not.
j) Ld. SPP submits that the job of investigating agency is over the moment sufficient evidence is filed
before the Court for taking cognizance and for trial of the accused persons so charge-sheeted. Ld.
SPP contends that cognizance is one thing whilst filing of a police report is another. The filing of
police report may come much earlier whilst cognizance may be taken much later. There is a thin line
between the two and the respondents are trying to disrupt and create Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 confusion on this issue. Ld. SPP
has drawn the attention of this Court to the earlier judgements rendered by this Court dated
15.03.2022 in Bail Appl No.120/2022 titled Suraj v State NCT of Delhi & judgement dated
04.08.2006 in Bail Appl No. 2542/2006 titled Deepender Kumar Srivastava v State (CBI).
k) Ld. SPP urges that merely since investigation was pending against other accused regarding
certain aspects, it would not justify grant of statutory bail to an accused against whom chargesheet
has been filed and there is sufficient evidence against him to face trial. Reference has been made to
the following judgements to support this contention. ‚  Amarjeet Sharma v SFIO, 2022 SCC OnLine
Del 3633; ‚  Ujjawal Bajaj V State of Delhi (NCT) Crl. Rev. P. 201/2021 ‚  Dinesh Jaiswal v State of
Assam, Bail Appl N. 36/2023; ‚  Anantha Satya Udaya Bhaskara Rao Anantha Babu vState of
Andhra Pradesh, Crl. Petition No. 6954/2022; ‚  Ranjit Kumar Borah v CBI, Bail Appl Nos.
229/2022, 173/2022 & 459/2022;
‚  Maninder Singh v State (NCT of Delhi), Crl. MC. 260/2023;
and ‚  Peerzada Rafiq Moqdoomi v Union Territory of J&K, Crl A (D) 17/2022.
II. Investigation Qua Respondents was Complete
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
8
a) It is submitted that in the instant case, investigation qua Respondents were complete. There was
sufficient evidence on which cognizance could be taken. In fact, cognizance has been taken by the
Ld. Special Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55
Judge on 26.11.2022, whereby there was no observation made regarding the report being
incomplete although, there was specific reference that investigation was ongoing with respect to
certain aspects in the said order. Ld. SPP submits that there is sufficient evidence against
Respondents to face trial.
b) Ld. SPP submits that in fact in the present case, the FIR/RC was registered u/s 120-B r/w 409,
420 & 477A of IPC and u/s 13(2) r/w 13(1)(d) of PC Act, 1988 against Respondents and others.
Whereas the final report filed by the CBI u/s 173 Cr.P.C. was for commission of additional offences
i.e. u/s 120-B r/w 206, 411, 424, 465, 468 IPC, besides the offences mentioned in FIR/RC.
c) Ld. SPP reiterates that merely because investigation was pending with respect to certain facets of
the case or regarding involvement of co- accused, it would not mean that investigation was
incomplete against Respondents. Ld. SPP submits that in fact the Respondents never claimed that
the evidence led against them was not sufficient for them to face trial. It has been submitted that
even their challenge to the cognizance is on the legal aspect regarding them being termed as „public
servants€, thus, facing trial for commission of offences under PC Act.
d) Ld. SPP argues that in any case, separate trial is a rule and joint trial is an exception and
pendency of investigation qua others would not make any difference to the present accused. Merely
because investigation regarding the role of other accused was pending, does not mean that
investigation regarding the role of Respondents with regards to the total embezzled amount of Rs.
34,926.77 crores had not Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing
Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 been investigated. Ld. SPP vehemently argues that the report under
section 173 report may not contain all the details of the offences, and just like an FIR/RC, even the
report under section 173 Cr.P.C. is not an encyclopaedia. Reliance has been placed on the
judgements in K Veerswami (supra) and Dalmia (supra) whereby it was held that it is not necessary
that all the details of the offences must be stated in the chargesheet, and the details of the offence
are required to be proved at a later stage i.e. during the course of trial of the case by adducing
evidence. In any case, it is the right of the prosecution to decide whom it wants to prosecute.
Moreover, investigating agency can also decline to array a person as a co-accused, and instead
examine him as a witness. Reference has been made to A.R. Antulay v R.S. Nayak & Anr., AIR 1988
SC 1531.
e) Therefore, solely because certain accused were not charge-sheeted or not made an accused, as
urged by Respondents, would not give them the right to be released on statutory bail.
f) The investigation is conducted only with regards to commission of offence and not with regards to
involvement of an accused. Therefore, to aver that, investigation would only be complete if the same
is complete against all accused, would be an erroneous interpretation. Ld. SPP has relied on the
judgement in State of Haryana and Others v. Ch. Bhajan Lal and Others, 1992 Cri. L.J. 527.
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
9
g) Ld. SPP submits that there is no merit in the argument propounded by the Ld. Counsel for the
respondents with respect to the chargesheet being incomplete. The averment that if chargesheet
stands complete, there would be no other evidence against the Respondents which Signature Not
Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 would be filed in the
supplementary chargesheet is flawed. Ld. SPP contends that what has to be looked into for grant of
statutory bail is whether prosecution has been able to accumulate sufficient evidence for an accused
to face trial or for the Court to take cognizance. The judgements relied above, in fact, specifically
hold that filing of a chargesheet does not extinguish the statutory right of the investigating agency to
conduct further investigation and to submit supplementary report, and this does not give the right
of statutory bail to an accused. Ld. SPP argues that in fact the very purpose of Section 173 (8) Cr.P.C.
is to accumulate any further or other evidence which may be found against the accused already
facing trial. Mere pendency of further investigation mentioned in the report under section 173
Cr.P.C. would not mean that the report filed was incomplete. Reliance has been placed on Vipul
Shital Prasad Agarwal v State of Gujarat (2013) 1 SCC 197.
h) It has been submitted that the Hon€ble Supreme Court in its recent judgement in Anand Thanur
Karmuse v State of Maharasthra, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 180, observed that the Court can order
further investigation even after filing of the chargesheet and framing of charges. It is thus submitted
that conduct of further investigation cannot be an impediment to the trial of an accused.
i) Ld. SPP has further drawn the attention of this Court to the judgement in Vinay Tyagi vs. Irshad
Ali, (2013) 5 SCC 762, relied upon by the Respondents. In the said judgement it has been held that
there are three kinds of investigation i.) Initial investigation, ii) Further investigation & iii) Fresh or
De novo investigation. Further Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing
Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 investigation was defined as continuation of primary investigation and is
called supplementary report which is meant to supplement the primary report which is submitted by
the empowered investigating officer. As stated above, it is trite that mere pendency of further
investigation which is continuation of primary investigation would not give statutory right to
accused for grant of bail. All that is required to be considered is, whether there is sufficient evidence
against accused to face trial in the case, if so, the chargesheet so filed shall be deemed to be
complete. It was further observed in Vinay Tyagi (supra) that even subsequent to taking cognizance,
Magistrate can direct further investigation, since conduct of proper and fair investigation is
hallmark of any criminal investigation.
j) It is submitted that in a case wherein Court takes cognizance and then directs further
investigation, the same would not imply that the investigation was not complete. Ld. SPP submits
that similar is the situation when after filing of the report, Investigating Officer deems it proper to
file a supplementary report.
k) Ld. SPP further contends that the plea of the Respondents that they were arrested without
completion of investigation, which the Petitioner CBI could always have done subsequently, is
without any legal basis, for the reason that whether to arrest an accused or not and when and where
to arrest an accused, is the sole prerogative of the investigating agency. Ld. SPP has invited the
attention of this Court to the order of the Hon€ble Supreme Court in SLP (Crl.) No (s). 4123/2021
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
10
titled Vishwanath Biradar v Deepika & Anr.
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55
l) Ld. SPP additionally argued that the Respondents in the current case were apprehended due to
their role as the primary accused, and the entire case heavily depends on their involvement. This is
due to their influential position, which grants them control over the witnesses and other individuals
involved. There exists a possibility of tampering with the evidence and a potential for persuading the
witnesses to change their testimony. Moreover, there exists ample evidence to reflect that the
respondents, while in custody in other case, were freely meeting with co-accused and other persons
and committing offences with impunity as mentioned in the report under section 173 Cr.P.C. They
fabricated documents, tampered with, and sold case property. Therefore, there were cogent reasons
to apprehend the Respondents.
m) Ld. SPP submits that the Ld. Special Judge in the impugned order held that the following aspects
had not been investigated by the CBI and as such deemed the chargesheet incomplete. The following
aspects are:
(i) Offences under SEBI Act regarding insider trading.
Ld. SPP submits that no offence under SEBI Act was mentioned in the FIR. Moreover, further
offence regarding insider share trading was revealed during the investigation, and that by itself does
not amount to incomplete investigation. Reliance has been placed on the judgement of a Coordinate
Bench of this Court dated 11.04.2023 in Bail Appl No. 3195/2022 titled Riyazuddin v State NCT of
Delhi.
                                 (ii)    Regarding offences under IT Act.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:RAJ
BALA
Signing Date:30.05.2023
17:25:55
It is submitted that no provision of IT Act was invoked in the FIR/RC. Further as per investigation
no offence under IT Act was made out. Although, forgery was mentioned, however, since FoxPro
system was not integrated with Synergy system, therefore, even otherwise IT Act could not be
invoked.
(iii) Role of accused specifically named in FIR such as Sudhakar Shetty, M/s Amarylis Reality etc.
have not been investigated.
As reiterated above, it is immaterial that investigation qua other co accused is pending, as the same
does not entitle the Respondents for grant of statutory bail.
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
11
(iv) Trail of entire Rs. 34,926.77 crores is yet to be found out and CBI has only seized a few hundred
crores. It is submitted that as held in Dalmia (supra) pendency of investigation regarding end - use
of funds would not be a reason to grant bail. In any case, investigation regarding money trail would
be an offence under PMLA which is being investigated by the Directorate of Enforcement. Further
since recovery could not be affected despite best efforts of Petitioner CBI, cannot be a ground to
render the investigation as incomplete, especially since the offence against Respondents and their
role in commission thereof has been fully established.
(v) The role of CA, bank officials, NHB officials is yet to be investigated.
Ld. SPP submits that the investigation regarding involvement of other persons would not be a
reason to grant statutory bail to Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing
Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 the respondents. The evidence contained in the chargesheet is sufficient
for trial against accused and taking cognizance against them.
(vi) The role of accused persons in conspiracy is not fully described in the chargesheet.
It is submitted that involvement of the Respondents in the conspiracy is completely described and is
apparent from the report u/s 173 Cr.P.C. and the documents filed therewith. Ld. SPP submits that it
is settled that conspiracy is like a moving train where conspirators can get in and get out at any
stage, and it is not necessary or essential that all the parties should have been present from start to
finish and take part in each and every act of the other conspirators. Thus, the role of co-accused has
got nothing to do with the larger conspiracy as hatched by the Respondents.
n) Petitioner thus prays that in the interest of justice and in light of the submissions above made, the
impugned order dated 03.12.2022 be quashed and the default bail granted to the Respondents be
cancelled.
19. Non applicability of the judgements cited by the respondents:
a) It has been vehemently argued by the Ld. SPP for CBI that the judgements relied upon by the
respondents above, do not apply to the present case. It has been contended that none of the
judgments relied upon by the respondents are of the nature wherein the investigation in the case
was complete.
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55
b) Ld. SPP submits that in Aslam Babalal Desai (supra) it has been re- affirmed by the Hon€ble
Supreme Court that an accused is not entitled to bail once chargesheet is filed within the mandatory
period. In the said case, the statutory bail granted was subsequently cancelled after the chargesheet
was filed. It was held that investigation should be completed within the mandatory period. The
aspect of completion of investigation or what was complete chargesheet was not discussed in the
said judgement. The said judgement does not help the respondents in the instant case in any
manner. It is submitted that in the present case chargesheet was filed within the mandatory period,
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
12
thus as narrated above, the test for grant of bail can only be considered upon merits and not under
the provision of section 167(2) Cr.P.C.
c) Ld. SPP for CBI further submits that in Vinay Tyagi (supra) the issue of statutory bail was not
involved, on the contrary, the issue was after completion of investigation and filing of chargesheet
by the police, the investigation by CBI was ordered.
d) In Judgebir Singh @ Jasbir (supra) it had been reiterated by the Hon€ble Supreme Court that
once investigation is concluded within the mandatory period no right would accrue to the accused to
be released on bail u/s 167(2) Cr.P.C. It was further observed that filing of documents is directory
and further investigation was not precluded. It was also held that investigating agency can place
documents on the record even later. It was further held that report u/s 173 Cr.P.C. is an intimation
to the Magistrate and the said report purports to be an opinion of the investigating officer. The said
report is complete if is Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing
Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 accompanied with all the documents and statements and nothing more is
required to be mentioned in the said report. Ld. SPP contends that the said judgement in fact goes
in favour of the Petitioner CBI. In the said case, the Hon€ble Supreme Court has also referred to
Suresh Bikamchand Jain (supra) to reiterate that filing of chargesheet is sufficient compliance with
the provisions of Section 167 Cr.P.C. and once chargesheet has been filed within the stipulated time
the question of grant of statutory bail does not arise.
e) Ld. SPP for CBI submits that further in Enforcement Directorate v Kapil Wadhawan (supra) the
issue was with respect to whether the date of remand is to be included or excluded for considering a
claim for default bail u/s 167(2) Cr.P.C. when computing the 60/90 days period. It has be submitted
that in fact even in the said case it was held that Section 173(2) Cr.P.C. prescribes for filing of final
report which empowers the Court to take cognizance and Section 173 (8) Cr.P.C. allows further
investigation.
f) Ld. SPP submits that furthermore in Tunde Gbaja v CBI (supra), the FIR was registered for
offences under the IPC for which chargesheet had to be filed within 90 days. The accused was
arrested for commission of offences under IPC. During the investigation it was found that accused
had also committed offences under Foreigners Act. Chargesheet was filed for commission of
offences under the Foreigners Act for which the investigation had to be completed within 60 days,
however, chargesheet for commission of offences under IPC was not filed, although, the FIR was
registered for commission of Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing
Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 offence under IPC. It has been submitted that thus, the said judgement
would not be applicable in the facts and circumstances of the present case since the chargesheet was
filed in respect of offences both under the IPC as well as PC Act, as mentioned in the FIR/RC.
g) Ld. SPP submits that in P Vijayaraghavan & Ors. v CBI (supra) the issue was that at the time of
filing of chargesheet the Investigating Officer was awaiting expert opinion on the question as to
whether a chargesheet would lie u/s 201 IPC or not. Thus, it was held that investigation was not
complete at the time of filing of the chargesheet. The said decision is not relevant in the facts and
circumstances of the present case.
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
13
h) In Hargovind Bhargava v State of M.P. (supra) the investigation was kept pending against the
arrested accused to defeat the provision of Section 167 (2) Cr.P.C. The said judgement would not be
applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
i) Ld. SPP submits that even Satender Kumar Antil v CBI (supra) only reiterates that right u/s 167
(2) Cr.P.C. is an indefeasible right if the chargesheet is not filed within the stipulated time.
j) It has been submitted that in Rakesh Kumar Paul v State of Assam (supra) the legal position
settled by Sanjay Dutt (supra) was reiterated and it was held that the indefeasible right accruing to
an accused is enforceable only prior to filing of the chargesheet and it gets extinguished thereafter.
However, in the present case the chargesheet was filed within the mandatory period and it was held
that accused has an indefeasible right u/s 167 (2) Cr.P.C.
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55
k) In Chitra Ramakrishna v CBI (supra) the FIR was registered for commission of offences under
IPC, PC Act and IT Act. During the pendency of the said investigation a request was received by the
Ministry of Finance to investigate other aspects in terms of an order passed by SEBI. Chargesheet
was filed by the CBI only in respect of the subsequent aspects as highlighted in the SEBI€s order and
not with regard to the allegations mentioned in the FIR. This Court termed the chargesheet as
incomplete. Further the investigation was not completed with regard to all the offences as
mentioned in the FIR and that the Court was not in a position to take cognizance of those offences.
It is submitted that the said judgement was passed in peculiar facts of the case. In the said case it
was further held that the chargesheet can be said to be complete when it enables the Court whether
or not to take cognizance of the offence and if certain facets called for further investigation it would
not render such report other than a final report. It was further observed that even if the police report
is termed as incomplete by the investigating officer, the power of a Magistrate to take cognizance
would not be lost.
l) Ld. SPP for the CBI submits that thus the impugned order passed by the Ld. Spl. Judge granting
default bail to the respondents is bad in law, unjustified, illegal and perverse. It is trite that this
Court can interfere with an order if such an order is unreasonable, illegal, perverse or based on
irrelevant materials/evidence on record, and in order to secure ends of justice and to prevent the
abuse of the courts. Reliance has been placed on Puran v Rambilas & Anr., AIR 2001 SC Signature
Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 2023; Kanwar Singh
Meena v State of Rajasthan & Anr., AIR 2013 SC 296.
20. Contentions on behalf of the respondents namely Kapil Wadhawan & Dheeraj Wadhawan:
a) Ms. Rebecca John and Sh. Amit Desai, Ld. Senior Counsels for the respondents submit that the
Ld. Spl. Court vide its impugned order dated 03.12.2022 has rightly granted default bail to the
respondents herein, after meticulously examining the material on record and going through the
various judicial precedents on the subject. It has been submitted that the Ld. Special Court has
rightly held that CBI has filed its chargesheet without completing investigation qua accused persons
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
14
named in the FIR, and with respect to various offences and transactions, thereby, entitling the
Respondents to grant of default bail under Section 167(2), Cr.P.C.
b) Ld. Senior counsels submit that however, prior to rebutting the fallacies as furthered by the
petitioner CBI and at the cost of repetition, it is imperative to glance over the admitted facts as set
out in the present case.
c) A consortium of banks led by Union Bank of India filed a complaint with the CBI on 11.02.2022
against the Respondents and other accused persons. The crux of the allegation in the Complaint is
set out as under:
"27. In the above manner, the said Shri Kapil Wadhawan, Dheeraj Rajeshkumar
Wadhawan, the promoters of DHFL, in conspiracy with others, including public
servants, induced the DHFL Consortium Banks to sanction and disburse the loans/
advances/subscription in NCDs aggregating to Rs. 42,871.42 Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 crores dishonestly
and fraudulently misappropriated such public funds raised by the said DHFL and
diverted the same to the DHEL Group entities/Sahana Group Entities/other parties
named above....
28. The role of auditors of DHFL and DHFL Promoter Groups companies/Sahana
Group companies may be looked into during the course of investigation..."
(Emphasis supplied)
d) The Complaint relied upon 3 exhaustive Forensic Audit Reports conducted by
KPMG and Grant Thornton India LLP prepared on the instructions of the
Complainant banks and the Administrator of DHFL appointed by the RBI, which set
out the details of the various persons and companies involved, their shareholding
patterns, relevant entries of balance sheets and other financial statements were
produced and exhaustively analysed.
e) Thereafter, around 4 months from the date of the Complaint, the CBI registered the present FIR
on 20.06.2022 against the Respondents, Sudhakar Shetty, Amaryllis Realtors LLP, Gulmarg
Realtors LLP, Skylark Buildcon Pvt. Ltd., others and unknown public servant/s under Sections
120-B г/w 409, 420 & 477A, IPC and Section 13(2) г/w 13(1)(d) of PC Act.
f) At the time of the registration of present FIR, the Respondents were in judicial custody in 3
different matters i.e., (i) ECIR bearing No. 3 of 2020 registered by Enforcement Directorate,
Mumbai, (ii) FIR bearing No. RC 2192020 E004 registered by the CBI, New Delhi and
(iii) FIR bearing No. RC 006 2020 A0005 registered by the CBI, Lucknow since around April 2020.
It has been submitted that despite Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing
Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 there being no emergent need to arrest the Respondents and take them in
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
15
custody, the CBI arrested the Respondents on 19.07.2022. The 90- day period from the arrest of the
Respondents was due to expire on 17.10.2022. It is pertinent to note that from the several
individuals/ entities referred to in the Complaint, the CBI deliberately following its pick and choose
policy arrested only the Respondents in the matter apart from two other individuals not named in
the Complaint.
g) On the 88th day, i.e. on 15th October, 2022 which was a Saturday, the CBI filed the purported
chargesheet against 18 individuals and 57 entities (without naming any of their Directors/
authorized representatives as Accused). The relevant excerpt of the chargesheet at Para 66 states as
under:
"66. With regard to ascertaining roles of remaining FIR named accused persons
namely Sh. Sudhakar Shetty, M/s Amaryllis Realtors & Ms Gulmarg Realtors,
remaining CAs (who had audited balance sheets of e-DHFL & Shell companies and
who had facilitated the promoters), ultimate beneficiaries/end use of diverted funds
through shell companies & other Wadhawan Group Companies, the DHFL officials,
insider share trading of DHFL shares, bank officials, NHB officials and other
connected issues, further investigation us 173 (8) of Cr. P.C. is continuing."
h) Ld. Senior Counsel for the respondents submits that the filing of the chargesheet was a
subterfuge/ruse to defeat the indefeasible right of the Respondents to default bail under Section
167(2), Cr.P.C. Ld. Senior counsel submits that the same can be determined from a perusal of the
allegations set out in the FIR as against the chargesheet and relies on the following table to draw
comparison:
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55
COMPARISON OF THE FIR AND THE CHARGESHEET S.No. Individual/entity and allegation
Piecemeal & incomplete in FIR chargesheet
1. 66 companies with commonalities Out of the 66 companies to Respondents Entities listed out in
the Complaint, The Complaint alleges disbursal of only 10 companies have loans aggregating to Rs.
29,100.33 been named Accused in the crores to 66 entities by DHFL, with chargesheet. an
outstanding amount of Rs. Thus, investigation into the 29849.62 crores. outstanding amounts of the
remaining 56 companies i.e., Rs. 16,480.9 crores is admittedly incomplete.
                            2.       65 companies with irregular loan       Out of the 6
                                     disbursal                              listed out i
                                     The Complaint alleges disbursal of     none have be
                                     loans aggregating to Rs. 24,595        accused in t
                                     crores to 65 entities (all of which    Thus, invest
                                     have been listed in the Complaint      11,909.05   
                                     along with details on the nature of    admittedly i
                                     the investment/loan), with an
                                     outstanding of Rs. 11,909 crores.
                            3.       Sudhakar Shetty & his entities,        Sudhakar She
                                     Amaryllis Realtors LLP (ARLIP)         have not bee
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
16
                                     and Gulmarg Realtors LLP               accused desp
                                     (GRLLP)                                in the FIR a
                                     Sudhakar Shetty and his entities       and admitted
                                     have been shown to have received       investigated
                                     loans of approximately of Rs.          Investigatio
                                     11,650 crores from DHFL and are        GRLLP       
alleged to be co-conspirators in the incomplete. diversion of funds by DHFL.
Sudhakar Shetty is the owner of the Sahana Group, which is alleged to have "commonalities with
DHFL Promoters" and in which the Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing
Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 Respondents are alleged to have "prima facie financial interest".
4. Public servants Admittedly, the CBI has not It is alleged in the Complaint that
named/investigated any the Respondents, "in conspiracy official of the consortium of with others,
including public banks or the National servants" committed the offences Housing Bank. of
conspiracy, criminal breach of trust, cheating, falsification of accounts, etc. The Complaint, whilst
referring to officials of the consortium of banks, states that the role of unknown public servants may
be looked into during the course of investigation.
5. 12 Directors of DHFL Only 3 Directors of DHFL The FIR sets out the details of the have been
made accused, 12 Directors of DHFL. without furnishing an explanation as to what investigation has
been done into the role of the remaining Directors.
6. Insider Share Trading Admittedly not investigated The Complaint alleges that large as per para 66
of the amounts were disbursed as loans & Chargesheet advances by DHFL to a number of
inter-connected entities and individuals with commonalities to DHFL Promoter Entities, which
were diverted/ misappropriated for purchase of shares/ debentures.
It is alleged that out of the 66 entities that were disbursed loans by DHFL, 16 entities/ individuals
had invested more than Rs. 100 crores in shares or debentures of entities allegedly owned and
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 controlled
by the Respondents.
Thus, the aggregate outstanding Rs 30,000 crores (approx.) amounts in respect of
Individuals/entities that have admittedly not been investigated.
i) Moreover, it is submitted that major aspects of investigation as stated in the Remand Applications
filed by the CBI at the time of seeking police custody of the Respondents have also not been
investigated. Even though CBI sought police custody of the Respondents, even those aspects of
investigation are incomplete. Ld. Senior counsel submits that thus, the investigation is incomplete
even qua the Respondents, as is clear from a comparison of the Remand Applications with the
chargesheet as tabulated below: COMPARISON OF THE AVERMENTS IN THE REMAND
APPLICATIONS AND THE ALLEGATIONS IN THE CHARGESHEET S.No. Averment in Remand
Application Status of investigation stating aspect that needs investigation as per the chargesheet
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
17
Averment common to all Remand Applications
1. As a matter of fact, the Remand Paragraph no. 66 of the Applications state as under - chargesheet
inter alia Allegations in the FIR against inter alia states that investigation "Sudhakar Shetty (A-4),
Amaryllis into the role of Realtors LLP (A-5), Gulmarg Realtors Sudhakar Shetty, LLP (A-6) ... and
other unknown Amaryllis Realtors LLP persons including public servants..." and Gulmarg Realtors
that entered into a criminal conspiracy to LLP and the bank / cheat the consortium of 17 banks led
by NHB officials and Union Bank of India, thereby causing a public servants is wrongful loss of Rs.
34,000 crores to the pending. consortium.
Remand Application dated 19.07.2022 seeking 10 days' police custody Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55
2. Investigation into the routing of funds to Admittedly, as per foreign countries for creation of
assets in paragraph no. 66 of the the name of the Respondents, their chargesheet, the end-use family
members and shell companies of funds and the owned and controlled by them. ultimate
beneficiaries thereof have not been investigated. Further,
3. Ascertaining the investments abroad that the recoveries in the have not come to light and for
seizure/ matter are to the tune of forfeiture of the same. 0.02% of the amounts alleged to have been
siphoned off.
Remand Application dated 27.07.2022 seeking 7 days' police custody
4. Examination with regard to loans None of the 65 entities extended to 65 entities to the tune of
have been made an 14,000 crores. Accused, which were claimed to be under investigation in the
Remand Application.
                                                                          The list of 65
                                                                          whom       loa
                                                                          advanced was a
                                                                          the Complaint.
5. Interrogation with regards to voluminous Admittedly only 43 documents/ digital data related to
95 companies out of the entities belonging to various suspects/ alleged 95 entities accused with
which both accused are to belonging to the be confronted. Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have been made
an Accused in the present Chargesheet.
6. Ascertaining the roles of bankers/ public Investigation into the servants who had sanctioned
loans to officials of the DHFL and to find out whether any public Complainant banks as servant was
paid any illegal admittedly well as the National gratification/ bribe for favouring the Housing Bank
is Wadhawan brothers in the matter of pending, including the sanction and disbursement of loans.
aspect of illegal Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023
17:25:55 gratification/ bribery.
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
18
7. Recovery of the defrauded loan amount The CBI has managed of Rs. 34,000 crores of which the to
recover only 0.02% Complainant banks have suffered a of the allegedly wrongful loss.
misappropriated amount. Even the impugned Order dated 03.12.2022 records that the investigation
is incomplete inter alia because the CBI has recovered only a few crore rupees out of the total
amount of Rs.
34,926.77 crores.
Remand Application dated 30.07.2022 seeking 3 days' police custody
8. Acquisition of shares of Dhanalakshmi The chargesheet is Bank, Vallash Polyplast and Wadhawan
silent with regard to this Global valued at Rs. 17.98. crores allegation. through the broker Anique
Stock Broking Ltd., Mumbai, apprehended to be acquired from proceeds of the defrauded amount.
9. Confronting the Accused with the Only 2 Directors Directors of the shell companies in which
(Accused Nos. 6 and 7) the funds were diverted. have been named accused in the chargesheet.
57companies have been made Accused, without disclosing the role of the concerned Director or
official.
10. Ascertaining the role of bankers/ public Investigation into the servants who had sanctioned
loans to officials of the DHFL. Complainant banks as well as the NHB is admittedly pending.
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55
j) Ld. Senior counsels submit that the above tables clearly demonstrate that the investigation in the
matter with regard to the individuals, entities and the alleged fraud of Rs. 34,000 crores is still
incomplete and at an initial stage. Ld. Senior counsel submits that as held by the Ld. Spl. Court in its
impugned Order and uncontroverted by the CBI, the investigation in the instant matter will take a
few years to complete and the Respondents will continue to languish in the jail, deprived of their
personal liberties. Ld. Senior counsel urges that this will make it even more alarming for the
respondents given that CBI has failed to file even a single supplementary chargesheet in the matter.
k) Ld. Senior counsels argue that it is the duty of Courts to protect the liberty of accused from the
practice of investigating agencies of filing preliminary chargesheets without completing
investigation as a subterfuge to defeat the right of default bail and misusing remand 309 of Cr. P.C.,
1973. Ld. Senior counsel has placed reliance on the following judgements to buttress this contention.
‚  Aslam Babalal Desai v. State of Maharashtra, (1992) 4 SCC ‚  Rakesh Kumar Paul v. State of
Assam, (2017) 15 SCC 67 ‚  Satender Kumar Antil v. CBI,(2022) 10 SCC 51
l) It has been submitted that further investigation (as opposed to initial investigation into the FIR) is
only in respect of fresh or new information coming to light, subsequent to filing of the chargesheet.
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
19
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 Reliance
has been placed on Vinay Tyagi v. Irshad Ali (2013) 5 SCC
m) It has been further submitted that cognizance is not the relevant basis for determining if
investigation is complete for the purpose of default bail under Section 167(2), Cr.P.C. Reliance has
been placed on Suresh Kumar Bhikamchand Jain v. State of Maharashtra, (2013) 3 SCC 77;
Judgment dated 01.05.2023 in Crl. Appeal No. 1011 of 2023 titled Judgebir Singh v. National
Investigating Agency.
n) Ld. Senior counsel submits that the investigation has to be complete in respect of a case as a
whole, i.e., all facts and circumstances set out in the FIR. Reliance has been placed on Aslam Babalal
Desai v. State of Maharashtra (supra); P.V. Vijayaraghavan v. C.B.I, 1984 SCC OnLine Ker 95;
Tunde Gbaja v. Central Bureau of Investigation, 2007 (95) DRJ 429, which follows the judgment of
the Kerala High Court in P. V. Vijayaraghavan (supra).
o) Moreover, the investigation has to be completed qua all Accused persons named in the FIR.
Reliance has been placed on Hargovind Bhargava v. State of M.P. & Anr., 2016 SCC OnLine MP
12113. Further, investigation is required to be completed qua all the accused persons considering
that in cases of conspiracy under Section 120-B, IPC, a joint trial is to be conducted. Reliance has
been placed on State of A. P. v. Cheemalapati Ganeswara Rao, (1964) 3 SCR 297 & A.E. Pinto v.
C.B.I., 2002 (63) DRJ 697, to buttress this contention.
p) Furthermore, default bail has been granted by this Court on the ground of incomplete
investigation/chargesheet in Chitra Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing
Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 Ramkrishna (supra). Ld. Senior counsel submits that while the CBI has
tried to distinguish the said judgment with the instant case contending that it only pertains to
incomplete investigation pertaining to offences and sections and not allegations. However, this
contention of the petitioner is misplaced as in the said case it was inter alia held that investigation
was pending related to interconnected and interlinked offences which cannot be separated. Ld.
Senior counsel submits that the same aspect squarely applies to present case, wherein the alleged
conspiracy with respect to other accused persons/entities named in the FIR and other
interconnected issues have not been conducted and remains pending.
q) Ld. Senior counsel submits that the Courts must favour the Accused in the interpretation of
Section 167(2), Cr.P.C., being a provision to protect personal liberty, a fundamental right guaranteed
under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. Reliance has been placed on Aslam Babalal Desai v.
State of Maharashtra (supra); Judgment dated 27.03.2023 in Crl. A. Nos. 701-702 of 2020 titled
Enforcement Directorate v. Kapil Wadhawan and Ors.
21.Non applicability of the judgements cited by petitioner CBI
a) Ms. Rebecca John and Sh. Amit Desai, Ld. Senior Counsels for the respondents contended that
the judgements advanced by the petitioner CBI are not applicable to the instant case. Ld. Senior
counsels for the respondents submit that the judgement in Dinesh Dalmia v. CBI, (supra) is
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
20
inapplicable to the present case for the following reasons:
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 ‚  All the
accused named in the FIR had been named accused in the chargesheet and sent up for trial. Only
one accused was not investigated in this case as he was absconding. Whereas in present case
admittedly, the chargesheet has not been filed with respect to several accused persons/ entities
mentioned in the FIR who have not yet been investigated.;
‚  The Supreme Court in the said case observed "Whether an investigation in fact has remained
pending and the investigating officer has submitted the charge-sheet only with a view to curtail the
right of the accused would essentially be a question of fact."
‚  Further, it was held that so long as chargesheet is not filed within the meaning of Subsection (2) of
Section 173 of the Code, investigation remains pending. Pertinently, S. 173 (2) Cr.P.C. uses the
words „as soon as it is completed€.
b) This Court in Chitra Ramkrishna (supra) referring to judgement of the Hon€ble Supreme Court
in Dinesh Dalmia held that though further investigation is not precluded after the filing of the
chargesheet however if the initial investigation arising out of the FIR itself is incomplete, the
accused would be entitled to default bail. In the said case it was further held that investigation was
only partly complete while investigation relating to other allegations and offences remained
pending.
c) It has been submitted that the judgment of the Hon€ble Supreme Court in Abdul Azeez v.
National Investigation Agency, (2014) AIR SCW Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ
BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 6537, has no relevance to the facts and circumstances of
the present matter for the following reasons:
‚  The only ground for claiming that the chargesheet was incomplete was that certain
call records and foreign bank transaction details were not annexed to the
chargesheet. ‚  The said judgment has been distinguished by this Court in Chitra
Ramkrishna [SLP against which has been dismissed by Hon'ble Supreme Court],
whereby it was held that the observations in Abdul Azeez was only with regard to
some minor details which were pending verification and otherwise the Chargesheet
was complete in all aspects. Ld. Counsel submits that whereas in the present case, as
detailed by Petitioner itself in the Chargesheet, the investigation is pending on
several material aspects.
‚  This judgment does not lay down any law. It is purely on the facts of that case.
d) Ld. Senior counsels further submit that the judgment of the Hon€ble Supreme Court in YS Jagan
Mohan Reddy v. CBI, (2013) AIR SCW 2800, is inapplicable to the instant case for the following
salient reasons:
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
21
‚  Three supplementary chargesheets had been filed in separate RCs in a span of 9
months against the accused in the said case. ‚  The Hon€ble Supreme Court did not
record any observation on the completeness of the chargesheet because a specific
liberty was granted to the accused to approach the Trial Court to consider the prayer
for bail, independently.
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 ‚  The
Hon€ble Supreme Court has not expressed any finding on whether or not the chargesheet filed in
the said case was complete.
‚  The said judgement has been distinguished in Chitra Ramkrishna.
e) It has been submitted that the judgment of this Court in Riyazuddin v. State NCT of Delhi (supra)
is not applicable to the facts of the present case for the following reasons:
‚  In the said case, a chargesheet had already been filed, which was complete in all
respects. Pursuant thereto, further investigation under Section 173 (8), Cr.P.C. was
being carried out, during which certain fake Aadhar cards were found and the
offences under Section 419 and 420, IPC were added. ‚  Since the addition of the
offences were only based on fresh material that came to light after the completion of
the initial investigation. This Court held that the accused would not be entitled to
default bail in the facts of that case.
f) It has been further submitted that the judgment rendered in State of Maharashtra v. Sharad
Vinayak Dongre, AIR (1995) SC 231 does not support the case of the CBI for the following reasons:
‚  In the said case, the bulk of the evidence against the accused persons had already
been recorded and filed along with the chargesheet and investigation was pending
only in respect of some documents. Further, in the said case, the challenge was to an
order taking cognizance and not an Order under Section 167(2).Cr.P.C.
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 ‚  A
categorical statement was made on behalf of the investigating agency that it did not intend to file a
supplementary chargesheet, which in the view of the Court adequately protected the interests of the
accused.
g) Further, in Judgebir Singh v. NIA (supra) the Hon€ble Apex Court has clearly held that taking
cognizance is entirely different from completing the investigation. It also held that whether
cognizance has been taken or not is not relevant for the purpose of compliance of Section 167 of
Cr.P.C.
h) Ld. Senior counsels submit that the judgment of this Court in Amarjeet Sharma v. SFIO, Bail
Application No. 2710/2022 decided on 03.11.2022, is distinguishable from the present case on facts.
In the said case, default bail was sought on the ground that despite 15 days lapsing after the filing of
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
22
the chargesheet, there was no judicial order extending their remand as required under Section 167
and thus their custody was illegal. Completeness of the investigation was not in question before the
Court.
i) Ld. Senior counsels further submit that the judgement rendered in Vipul Shital Prasad Agarwal v.
State of Gujarat, (2013) 1 SCC 197, also does not apply to the facts of the instant case. In the said
case, the investigation was transferred from the local police to the CBI pursuant to an Order of the
Supreme Court. The local police had filed its chargesheet within the stipulated time period. But in
the investigation that had been transferred, where a new FIR (on the same facts and the same cause
of action) had been registered, no chargesheet had been filed. Thus, the Supreme Court in the said
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 matter was
not considering a case where the investigation was incomplete.
j) It has been submitted that reliance of the petitioner CBI in Narendra Kumar Amin v. CBI, AIR
2015 SC 1002, is misplaced since the controversy before the Hon€ble Supreme Court in the said case
pertained to whether or not the 90-day period under Section 167(2), Cr.P.C had come to an end and
further whether the absence of some documents (which were subsequently filed by the investigating
agency) would entitle the accused to default bail. The Hon€ble Supreme Court in the said case was
not considering a case where the investigation was incomplete.
k) Ld. Senior counsels submit that similarly, the judgment in Uday Mohanlal Acharya v. State of
Maharashtra, (2001) 5 SCC 453, is not applicable to the instant case. The question that arose before
the Hon€ble Supreme Court in the said case was the time at which the accused is said to have
availed of his indefeasible right to default bail. The Hon€ble Supreme Court in the said case was not
considering a case where the investigation was incomplete.
l) Furthermore, it has been submitted that the judgement of the Hon€ble Apex Court in SFIO v.
Rahul Modi, 2022 SC OnLine 153 does not assist the CBI in any manner. In the said case the legality
of the chargesheet or the completeness of the investigation were not in question before the Court.
Ld. Senior counsel submits in fact, the said judgment strengthens the case of the Respondents since
the Supreme Court held that cognizance is irrelevant for the purpose of Section Signature Not
Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 167(2), Cr. P.C. The same
view has also been reiterated in Judgebir Singh v. NIA (supra).
m) Ld. Senior counsels submit that the respondents filed the application for statutory bail on
29.10.2022. However, the same was kept pending, thereby violating the dictum of the Hon€ble
Supreme Court which held that all applications for statutory bail must be considered expeditiously.
It has been submitted that the cognizance was taken vide order dated 26.11.2022 and the Applicant's
application was allowed on 03.12.2022. Thus, the Applicants/Respondents availed of the remedy at
the earliest opportunity and was rightly granted statutory bail by the Ld. Spl. Court.
Findings & Analysis
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
23
22. The Constitution of India is a fountainhead of the law of the land and procedures and is a
shining light to show and guide us in order to secure the ends of the justice. Part-III of the
Constitution of India confers fundamental rights. One of the most important fundamental rights
enshrined in the Constitution of India is that of personal liberty. The basic underlying idea of Part
-III of the Constitution of India is to protect the people against the might of the State. On the one
hand, the Constitution confers extensive powers on the Government whereas under Part -III certain
rights have been granted to people against the executive and legislation and therefore such rights
have been regarded as fundamental. Article 21 is one of the luminary provisions in the Constitution
and occupies a great place of pride in the Constitution. Article 21 provides that no person shall be
deprived of his life or Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing
Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 personal liberty according to the procedure established by the law. Any
law in this country has to be subservient to the Constitution of India and must fulfil the object and
intendment of the same.
23. The provisions in the Cr. PC also in a way are meant to safeguard the rights of an individual.
Thus, the strict adherence to the provisions of the Cr. P.C. in fact amounts to ensuring the fulfilment
of the golden principles laid down in the Constitution of India. Section 57 of the Cr. P.C. provides
that a person arrested cannot be detained for more than 24 hours and such person has to be
produced within such time before the Court of law. The next important provision in this regard is
Section 167 Cr. PC which provides that if a person is arrested and detained in the custody and
investigation cannot be completed within 24 hours and there are grounds for believing that the
accusation or information is well founded, the investigation agency shall produce such persons
before the Court, the Court can authorize the detention of the accused in the custody as such learned
Magistrate deems fit, for a term not exceeding 15 days in the whole. It is a settled proposition that in
the first 15 days, the Court can remand such accused to judicial or police custody. Section 167 (2) (a)
(i) of the Cr. P.C. provides that such a custody cannot exceed 90 days where the investigation relates
to an offence punishable with death imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term not less than
ten years. Section 167 (2) (a)
(ii) states that the detention cannot exceed 60 days where the investigation relates to any other
offence. Section 167 (2) (a) further provides that the accused persons shall be released on bail if he is
prepared to and does furnish bail if the investigation is not completed Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 (emphasis supplied) within 60
days or 90 days as the case may be. The perusal of section 167 (2) Cr. P.C. makes it clear that the
magistrate can authorise the detention of the accused for the 60/90 days as the case may be, if he is
satisfied that adequate grounds exist for doing so. Thus, under Section 167 (2) the magistrate has no
power to authorize detention beyond the period of 60 days or 90 days, depending upon the facts of
the case, if the investigation is not completed. Thus as per Cr. P.C., it€s completion of investigation
and not filing of the charge sheet.
24. Section 173 provides filing of the report of the police officer on completion of investigation.
Section 173 (2) provides the procedure of forwarding a police report in the form prescribed by the
State Government. The opening words of Section 173 provides that every investigation under this
chapter shall be completed without unnecessary delay. Section 173 provides that if the report under
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
24
Section 173 (2) is in respect of the case where there is sufficient evidence or reasonable ground to
take cognizance of the offence upon the police report and try the accused or commit him for trial,
the police officer shall forward the documents as prescribed under section 173 (5). It is pertinent to
mention here that Section 173 (8) Cr. P.C. provides that even after filing of the report under section
173 (2) Cr. P.C., the police shall have the power to conduct further investigation in respect of an
offence even after the report under sub Section (2) has been forwarded to the magistrate. It also
provides that where upon such investigation, the officer in charge of the police station obtains
further evidence, oral or documentary, he shall forward to the Signature Not Verified Digitally
Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 magistrate a further report or report which
in common parlance is stated to be the supplementary report.
25. Section 309 Cr. PC is another provision for the grant of remand during inquiry or trial. Section
309 (2) Cr. P.C. provides that if the Court after taking cognizance of an offence, or commencement
of trial, finds it necessary or advisable to postpone the commencement of or adjourn any inquiry or
trial, it may from time to time, for reasons to be recorded, postpone or adjourn the same on such
terms as it thinks fit, for such time as it considers reasonable, and may by a warrant remand the
accused if in custody. Thus, the conjoint reading of Section 57 Cr. PC, Section 167 Cr. PC and Section
309 Cr.P.C. makes it amply clear that immediately upon arrest of an accused, the police has to
produce the accused before the Court within 24 hours and thereafter, during the investigation, the
Court can remand the accused for 60 days / 90 days as the case may be depending upon the nature
of the case. During the inquiry/trial the accused can be remanded to Judicial custody under section
309 Cr.P.C.
26. The holistic and literal reading of Section 167, also makes it clear that the magistrate/Court
cannot remand a person beyond 60 days or 90 days, for whatever reasons, if the investigation is not
completed. The completion of the investigation is indicated by filing of a report under Section 173
Cr. P.C. Thus, if all these provisions are read in tandem, the necessary corollary is that what is
required is the completion of the investigation and not mere filing of the report. Merely because the
report has been filed and investigation is not completed, cannot fulfil Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 the basic purpose and intention of
the legislature as provided under Section 167 Cr. P.C.
27. It is pertinent to mention that for this reason, the period of remand as provided earlier was
enhanced by virtue of amendment carried out in the year 1978, pursuant to the 41st Law
Commission Report.
28. Before proceeding further, it is also necessary to have a glance at the definition of inquiry or trial
as provided under the Code. Section 2 (g) of the Code defined „inquiry€ as every inquiry, other than
a trial, conducted under this Code by a Magistrate or Court. The trial begins after framing of the
charges and ends with a conviction or acquittal. Chapter XVIII to Chapter XXI of Cr. P.C. lays down
the provisions for conducting trial, which is immediately after XVII which relates to the framing of
charge.
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
25
29. Before proceeding further, it is also pertinent to mention that right to speedy trial also goes to
the root of the fundamental rights of an individual. The Apex Court of this land has laid down time
and again, that it is a right of every individual to have a fair and speedy trial. The basic purpose
behind laying down the time period for completion of investigation without making any exception is
to ensure that after a person is arrested the investigation should be completed without any fail and
the trial should begin and be completed as expeditiously possible.
30. Sh. Anupam S. Sharma, learned special PP for CBI and Ms. Rebecca M. John, and Mr. Amit
Desai, learned senior counsels for the accused persons have cited numerous judgments in support of
their contentions. But I consider that the core question is very simple Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 whether the so called charge sheet
filed by the CBI against the accused persons on 15.10.2022 can be termed as a report having been
filed upon completion of investigation. If this report is taken as a final report having been filed upon
completion of investigation then the order of the learned Special Judge is bound to be set aside and
the accused persons are not entitled to bail. But, if this report is merely filed to overcome the
provisions of Section 167 and the investigation is not completed then the order of learned Special
Judge cannot be interfered with. It is pertinent to mention that the order of the learned Session
Judge can be set aside only if it suffers from serious infirmities, illegalities or perversity.
31. The Court is very clear in its mind that merely because in the charge sheet if the investigating
agency has stated they want to conduct further investigation, the charge sheet cannot be termed as a
preliminary charge sheet. The police has a right to conduct further investigation. However, at the
same time, the investigating agency under the garb of further investigation cannot be allowed to file
the police report without completion of investigation, only to defeat the right of statutory bail. The
basic concept is that to fulfil the provision of Section 167, the charge sheet has to be filed upon
completion of investigation. It may be possible that investigation against the persons who are charge
sheeted are complete and further investigation qua other accused persons is continuing, then the
persons against whom the investigation is complete cannot be extended the benefit of the statutory
bail. But in the present case as has been shown by the learned defence counsels during the course of
arguments that Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023
17:25:55 substantial investigation even qua the present accused persons is incomplete. The question
to be considered is that whether the material evidence having been placed on record by CBI against
the present respondents/accused persons is sufficient to conduct the trial in respect of the offences
alleged against him. The offence alleged against the accused persons are very serious and very high
in magnitude. The material collected by the investigating agency so far, to the mind of this Court
falls too short. Rather, if, this report is considered to be a complete investigation qua the accused
persons, the investigating agency will suffer a lot. The Court as a guardian of the administration of
justice has to ensure that there is strict compliance of the provisions. The investigating agency in its
anxiety of keeping the accused persons in custody may take a plea that investigation is complete.
However, the best judge in this regard should be the trial Court.
32. This Court considers that the learned Trial has rightly made an observation that now the time
has come when the legislature will have to make certain provisions where the period of investigation
for such serious offences have to be extended subject to certain limitations and restrictions. It has
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
26
repeatedly been held that merely because cognizance has been taken, the right to statutory bail
cannot be extended or defeated. The basic parameter is that the charge sheet has been filed after the
completion of the investigation or not. We have not to go by the label of the charge sheet but to
examine whether actually investigation has been completed or not. If the investigation is not
completed then merely because the report has been filed, the Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed
By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 right of statutory bail cannot be defeated. Certainly
it depends upon the facts of each case and no fixed formula can be laid down in this regard.
33. A perusal of the various judgments cited by the CBI and defence counsel reflects the emphasis on
"sufficient evidence". Thus in the report filed by the investigating agency there should be sufficient
evidence to bring home the guilt of the accused. The purpose should not be merely to detain the
accused. The purpose is that if an offence has been committed it must reach to its logical end. The
detention during investigation or trial cannot be turned into a punitive detention. It is also a settled
proposition that further investigation can be conducted only after the investigation is complete.
34. In M. Ravindran v. Directorate of Revenue Intelligence, (2021) 2 SCC 485, a three-judge bench
of the Apex Court inter alia observed as under:
"17.9. Additionally, it is well-settled that in case of any ambiguity in the construction of a penal
statute, the courts must favour the interpretation which leans towards protecting the rights of the
accused, given the ubiquitous power disparity between the individual accused and the State
machinery. This is applicable not only in the case of substantive penal statutes but also in the case of
procedures providing for the curtailment of the liberty of the accused. 17.10. With respect to the
CrPC particularly, the Statement of Objects and Reasons (supra) is an important aid of construction.
Section 167(2) has to be interpreted keeping in mind the threefold objectives expressed by the
legislature, namely, ensuring a fair trial, expeditious investigation and trial, and setting down a
rationalised procedure that protects the interests of indigent sections of society. These objects are
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 nothing
but subsets of the overarching fundamental right guaranteed under Article 21.
17.11. Hence, it is from the perspective of upholding the fundamental right to life and personal
liberty under Article 21 that we shall clarify and reconcile the various judicial interpretations of
Section 167(2) for the purpose of resolving the dilemma that has arisen in the present case."
35. It is pertinent to mention here that neither of the parties have discussed the merits of the case. It
is also important to mention that the learned ASJ has passed a detailed and reasoned order inter
alia holding that the charge sheet so filed was incomplete. I consider that there is no ground to
interfere with or alter this opinion. It is a settled proposition that it is the jurisdiction of the
Magistrate/learned Special Judge alone to decide that whether the material placed by the
prosecution along with the report (charge sheet) was having sufficient evidence or not. Since the
learned Special Judge has recorded a reasoned and conscious view that the charge sheet so filed on
the face of it was incomplete, therefore this Court finds it difficult to interfere with the same. It is
also pertinent to mention that though the cognizance has been taken in this case, which to the mind
of this Court will not make any difference, in view of the fact that the charge sheet itself has been
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
27
held to be incomplete. But it is imperative to mention that despite repeated directions of expeditious
disposal of default bail applications by the superior Courts, in the present case, the application for
default bail was filed before the learned Special Judge on 29.10.2022 and was decided on
03.12.2022. The cognizance was taken during the interregnum period. This Court is of the Signature
Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 considered opinion
that the charge sheet filed by the CBI in the present case is an incomplete/piecemeal charge sheet
and terming the same as a final report under section 173 (2) Cr.P.C. merely to ruse the statutory and
fundamental right of default bail to the accused shall negate the provision under Section 167 Cr. PC
and will also be against the mandate of Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
36. I consider that the order passed by learned Sessions Judge is based on good reasoning and logic.
There is no illegality or perversity in the order of the learned Sessions Judge. I do not find any force
in the arguments of learned SPP that once the charge sheet had been filed qua the respondents, the
right of the statutory bail could not have been granted to them. The Court is the guardian of the
rights bestowed upon the accused persons. Strict compliance of the procedure is necessary to protect
the fundamental rights of an individual. Merely, filing of the chargesheet, whether incomplete or
piecemeal cannot defeat the basic purpose of Section 167 (2) Cr. P.C. The Court at this stage, also
cannot be expected to minutely appreciate the evidence, so as to ascertain whether the same is
"sufficient evidence or not". On the face of it, as reflected by the learned senior counsels, a major
part of the fraud is yet to be investigated. It is also a settled proposition that in criminal law if two
views are possible the Courts should favour an interpretation that safeguards and protects the rights
of the accused. The statement of objects and reasons of the Code plays a significant role in guiding
its interpretation. Section 167 (2) Cr.P.C. must be interpretated bearing in mind the three-fold
objectives expressed by Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RAJ BALA Signing
Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55 the legislature namely ensuring a fair trial, expeditious investigation and
trial, and establishing a rationalized procedure that protects the interests of the indigent strata of
society. These objects essentially serve as components of the overarching fundamental right
guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
37. This Court has examined all the judgements cited by both the parties.
First and foremost, what needs to be borne in mind is that the instant case has to be decided on the
facts and circumstances of the present case. However, as highlighted by the learned Special Judge in
its order dated 03.12.2022, it is made clear, that this Court too, has not gone into the merits of the
case and no expression made herein shall tantamount to be an expression of the merits of the case.
38. Accordingly, the order dated 03.12.2022 passed by Ld. Special Judge, P.C. Act, Rouse Avenue
District Courts, New Delhi, is upheld. The present petition is dismissed.
DINESH KUMAR SHARMA, J MAY 30, 2023 Pallavi Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed
By:RAJ BALA Signing Date:30.05.2023 17:25:55
Central Bureau Of Investigtation vs Kapil Wadhawan & Anr. on 30 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2922069/
28
