Supreme Court of India
Directorate Of Enforcement vs Padmanabhan Kishore on 31 October, 2022
Author: Hon'Ble The Justice
Bench: Hon'Ble The Justice, S. Ravindra Bhat, Hon'Ble Ms. Trivedi
                                                                       REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO………….. OF 2022
                             (arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 2668 OF 2022)
          DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT                           …..APPELLANT(S)
                                               versus
          PADMANABHAN KISHORE                                  ..RESPONDENT(S)
                                          JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, CJI
1. Leave granted.
2. This appeal challenges the final judgment and order dated 1.3.2021 passed by the High Court of
Judicature at Madras in Writ Petition No. 25670/2019.
3. The aforestated writ petition was filed by the respondent herein seeking quashing of proceedings
initiated against him under the provisions of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, Signature
Not Verified 2002 (“PML Act”, for short).
Digitally signed by BABITA PANDEY Date: 2022.10.31 18:30:43 IST Reason:
4. The basic facts which led to the filing of said writ petition stand captured in paragraphs 2.1 to 2.3
of the judgment under appeal, as under: -
“2.1 One Andasu Ravinder (A1), IRS, was working as Additional Commissioner of
Income Tax, Chennai. On intelligence, the Central Bureau of Investigation (for
brevity “the CBI”) checked a car that was parked in front of the premises of the said
Andasu Ravinder's (A1) house on 29.08.2011 and recovered a sum of Rs.50,00,000/-
in cash. It is alleged that Andasu Ravinder (A1) and one Uttam Chand Bohra (A3)
were in that car at that time.
Directorate Of Enforcement vs Padmanabhan Kishore on 31 October, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58987970/
1
2.2 During investigation, it came to light that the sum of Rs.50,00,000/- was handed
over to the said Andasu Ravinder (A1) by one Padmanabhan Kishore (A2), petitioner
herein, whose income tax file was pending with Andasu Ravinder (A1) for clearance.
Since Padmanabhan Kishore (A2) wanted certain benefits, he had allegedly paid the
sum of Rs.50,00,000/- as bribe to Andasu Ravinder (A1).
2.3 In connection with this seizure, the CBI registered an FIR in R.C.No.MA1 2011 A
0033 on 29.08.2011 and after completing the investigation, filed charge sheet in
C.C.No.3 of 2013 before the Special Court for the CBI Cases, Chennai, for the offences
under Section 120- B IPC and Sections 7, 12, 13(1)(d) r/w 13(2) of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988, against Andasu Ravinder (A1), Padmanabhan Kishore (A2),
Uttam Chand Bohra (A3), Ramakrishnan (A4), T.Banusekar (A5) and
P.Chandrasekaran (A6). Since the case registered by the CBI disclosed the
commission of a 'schedule offence' under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act,
2002 (for brevity “the PML Act”), the Enforcement Directorate registered a case in
E.C.I.R.No.13 of 2016 and after completing the investigation, filed a complaint in
C.C.No.60 of 2018 against Everonn Education Limited and three others including
Padmanabhan Kishore (A2) for the offences under Section 3 r/w 4 of the PML Act,
for quashing which, Padmanabhan Kishore (A2) is before this Court.”
5. As is evident from the quoted portion, the respondent had allegedly handed over a sum of
Rs.50,00,000/- (Rupees fifty lakhs only) to a public servant, which transaction and the surrounding
circumstances were projected in FIR dated 29.8.2011, leading to registration of crime under Section
120B, Indian Penal Code, 1860 (“IPC”, for short) and Sections 7, 12, 13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2)
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (“PC Act”, for short). Later, a case was registered by the
Enforcement Directorate against the accused including the respondent under Sections 3 and 4 of the
PML Act.
6. The basic submission advanced on behalf of the respondent was that the amount in question, as
long as it was in the hands of respondent, could not be said to be tainted money; that it assumed
such character only after it was received by the public servant; and as such the respondent could not
be said to be connected with proceeds of crime and could not be proceeded against under the
provisions of the PML Act. The submission was accepted by the High Court with the following
observations: -
“7. For attracting the penal provisions of the PML Act, the accused should have
projected the proceeds of a crime as untainted money. In this case, the sum of
Rs.50,00,000/- as long as it was in the hands of Padmanabhan Kishore (A2) could
not have been stated as a tainted money because it is not the case of the CBI in
C.C.No.3 of 2013 that Padmanabhan Kishore (A2) had mobilised Rs.50,00,000/- via
a criminal activity. The sum of Rs.50,00,000/- became the proceeds of a crime only
when Andasu Ravinder (A1) accepted it as a bribe. Even before Andasu Ravinder (A1)
could project the sum of Rs.50,00,000/- as untainted money, the CBI intervened and
seized the money in the car on 29.08.2011.
Directorate Of Enforcement vs Padmanabhan Kishore on 31 October, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58987970/
2
8. Therefore, the prosecution of Padmanabhan Kishore (A2) under the PML Act, in
our considered opinion, is misconceived.
7. The High Court thus allowed the writ petition and quashed the proceedings in PML Act against
the respondent, which decision is presently under challenge before us.
8. We have heard Mr. Balbir Singh, learned Additional Solicitor General of India in support of
appeal and Mr. S. Nagamuthu, learned senior counsel for the respondent.
9. The definition of proceeds of crime, as appearing in Section 2(1)(u) of the PML Act is as under: -
“2. Definitions. — (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— xxx xxx xxx
(u) “proceeds of crime” means any property derived or obtained, directly or
indirectly, by any person as a result of criminal activity relating to a scheduled
offence or the value of any such property or where such property is taken or held
outside the country, then the property equivalent in value held within the country or
abroad;
Explanation.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that "proceeds of crime" include
property not only derived or obtained from the scheduled offence but also any property which may
directly or indirectly be derived or obtained as a result of any criminal activity relatable to the
scheduled offence;”
10. Sections 3 and 4 of the PML Act which are the principal sections for the present purposes, are as
under: -
“3. Offence of money-laundering.— Whosoever directly or indirectly attempts to
indulge or knowingly assists or knowingly is a party or is actually involved in any
process or activity connected proceeds of crime including its concealment,
possession, acquisition or use and projecting or claiming] it as untainted property
shall be guilty of offence of money-laundering. Explanation.—For the removal of
doubts, it is hereby clarified that,—
(i) a person shall be guilty of offence of money- laundering if such person is found to
have directly or indirectly attempted to indulge or knowingly assisted or knowingly is
a party or is actually involved in one or more of the following processes or activities
connected with proceeds of crime, namely: —
(a) concealment; or
(b) possession; or
(c) acquisition; or
Directorate Of Enforcement vs Padmanabhan Kishore on 31 October, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58987970/
3
(d) use; or
(e) projecting as untainted property; or
(f) claiming as untainted property, in any manner whatsoever;
(ii) the process or activity connected with proceeds of crime is a continuing activity
and continues till such time a person is directly or indirectly enjoying the proceeds of
crime by its concealment or possession or acquisition or use or projecting it as
untainted property or claiming it as untainted property in any manner whatsoever.
4. Punishment for money-laundering.— Whoever commits the offence of money-laundering shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which
may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine: Provided that where the proceeds of crime
involved in money-laundering relates to any offence specified under paragraph 2 of Part A of the
Schedule, the provisions of this section shall have effect as if for the words “which may extend to
seven years”, the words “which may extend to ten years” had been substituted.”
11. Paragraph 8 of the Part-A of the Schedule to the PML Act deals with offences under the PC Act
and said paragraph is to the following effect: -
“PARAGRAPH 8 OFFENCES UNDER THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION ACT,
1988 (49 of 1988) Section Description of offence
7. Offence relating to public servant being bribed.
7A. Taking undue advantage to influence public servant by corrupt or illegal means or
by exercise of personal influence.
8. Offence relating to bribing a public servant.
9. Offence relating to bribing a public servant by a commercial organisation
10. Person in charge of commercial organisation to be guilty of offence.
11. Public servant obtaining undue advantage, without consideration from person
concerned in proceeding or business transacted by such public servant.
12. Punishment for abetment of offences.
13. Criminal misconduct by a public servant.
14. Punishment for habitual offender.”
Directorate Of Enforcement vs Padmanabhan Kishore on 31 October, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58987970/
4
12. The respondent stands charged for having committed offence of conspiracy to commit offences
punishable under Sections 7, 12, 13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) of the PC Act. The controversy in
the instant matter is not with regard to his involvement in the offence punishable under the PC Act,
but raises a question whether the respondent can be proceeded against under the provisions of the
PML Act.
13. The definition of “proceeds of crime” in PML Act, inter alia, means any property derived or
obtained by any person as a result of criminal activity relating to a scheduled offence. The offences
punishable under Sections 7, 12 and 13 are scheduled offences, as is evident from paragraph 8 of
Part-A of the Schedule to the PML Act. Any property thus derived as a result of criminal activity
relating to offence mentioned in said paragraph 8 of Part-A of the Schedule would certainly be
“proceeds of crime”.
14. The further question to be answered is: whether the role played by respondent could come
within the purview of Section 3 of the PML Act?
15. Said Section 3 states, inter alia, that whoever knowingly assists or knowingly is a party or is
actually involved in any process or activity connected with proceeds of crime including its
concealment, possession, acquisition or use shall be guilty of offence of money-laundering
(emphasis added by us).
16. It is true that so long as the amount is in the hands of a bribe giver, and till it does not get
impressed with the requisite intent and is actually handed over as a bribe, it would definitely be
untainted money. If the money is handed over without such intent, it would be a mere entrustment.
If it is thereafter appropriated by the public servant, the offence would be of misappropriation or
species thereof but certainly not of bribe. The crucial part therefore is the requisite intent to hand
over the amount as bribe and normally such intent must necessarily be antecedent or prior to the
moment the amount is handed over. Thus, the requisite intent would always be at the core before
the amount is handed over. Such intent having been entertained well before the amount is actually
handed over, the person concerned would certainly be involved in the process or activity connected
with “proceeds of crime” including inter alia, the aspects of possession or acquisition thereof. By
handing over money with the intent of giving bribe, such person will be assisting or will knowingly
be a party to an activity connected with the proceeds of crime. Without such active participation on
part of the person concerned, the money would not assume the character of being proceeds of crime.
The relevant expressions from Section 3 of the PML Act are thus wide enough to cover the role
played by such person.
17. On a bare perusal of the complaint made by the Enforcement Directorate, it is quite clear that the
respondent was prima facie involved in the activity connected with the proceeds of crime.
18. The view taken by the High Court that the respondent cannot be held liable for the offence under
the PML Act is thus completely incorrect.
Directorate Of Enforcement vs Padmanabhan Kishore on 31 October, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58987970/
5
19. The observations made by us regarding involvement of the respondent are prima facie in nature
and for considering whether the allegations made by the prosecution if accepted to be true at this
stage, would make out an offence or not. Needless to say that, on facts, the matter shall be
considered purely on merits at the appropriate stage(s).
20. We therefore allow this appeal and set aside the judgment and order passed by the High Court.
Consequently, the respondent shall continue to be arrayed and proceeded against in accordance
with law in E.C.I.R. No. 13 of 2016 registered by the Enforcement Directorate.
21. The appeal is thus allowed.
……………………………..CJI.
[Uday Umesh Lalit] ………………………………..J.
[Bela M. Trivedi] New Delhi;
October 31, 2022.
Directorate Of Enforcement vs Padmanabhan Kishore on 31 October, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58987970/
6
