Delhi High Court
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
                                       Neutral Citation Number 2023/DHC/000153
                 *       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                                                      Reserved on:31.10.
                                                                  Date of decision: 10.0
                 +       CS(COMM) 715/2019
                         M/S LIBERTY FOOTWEAR COMPANY          ..... Plaintiff
                                       Through: Mr.Rajshekhar Rao, Sr. Adv. with
                                                Mr.Kapil Wadhwa, Ms.Surya
                                                Rajappan, Ms.Tejasvini Puri,
                                                Advs.
                                       versus
                     M/S LIBERTY INTERNATIONAL               ..... Defendant
                                   Through: Mr.Vijay Pal Dalmia, Mr.Rajat
                                            Jain,  Mr.Aditya       Dhar   and
                                            Ms.Neelam Dalmia, Advs.
                 CORAM:
                 HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE NAVIN CHAWLA
                 I.A.474/2020
                 1.
This application has been filed by the defendant under Section 8 of the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Arbitration Act') praying that the parties to the suit be
referred to arbitration. It is the case of the defendant/applicant that there is an Arbitration
Agreement in the Partnership Deed dated 08.09.2003 between the parties and the disputes raised
by the plaintiff fall within the scope of the said Arbitration Agreement.
CASE OF THE PLAINTIFF
2. The plaintiff has filed the present suit, inter alia, for the following reliefs:-
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number
2023/DHC/000153 "A. A decree of permanent injunction restraining the Defendant, its business
associates, partners, directors, principal officers, family members, servants, agents, dealers,
distributors, franchisees and anyone acting for and on their behalf from selling, offer to sell,
manufacturing, advertising, promoting or in any other manner using the impugned trade name
LIBERTY INTERNATIONAL, Plaintiff's registered trade mark LIBERTY and the corporate logo
and/or any other mark identical/deceptively similar to Plaintiff's well- known trademark LIBERTY,
LIBERTY variant marks with respect to goods falling within Class 25 and any other cognate and
allied goods in any manner, so as to result in infringement of Plaintiff's registered trademark
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187367970/
1
LIBERTY.
B. A decree of permanent injunction restraining the Defendant, its business associates, partners,
directors, principal officers, family members, servants, agents, dealers, distributors, franchisees and
anyone acting for and on their behalf from selling, offer to sell, manufacturing, advertising,
promoting or in any other manner using the impugned trade name LIBERTY INTERNATIONAL,
Plaintiff's registered trade mark LIBERTY and the corporate logo and/or any other mark
identical/deceptively similar to Plaintiff's well- known trademark LIBERTY, LIBERTY variant
marks with respect to goods falling within Class 25 and any other cognate and allied goods in any
manner, so as to result in passing off or any act of Unfair Competition including resulting in
confusion of any manner whatsoever. C. For an order of delivery up of all the material bearing the
impugned trademark, impugned trade name, impugned logos on packaging, labels, name, cartons,
packaging material, name plates, publicity material like pamphlets, fliers, Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number 2023/DHC/000153
hoardings, sign boards, stationery, digital material, website, internet, social media etc. for the
purpose of destruction/erasure.
D. For an order directing the Defendant to render the accounts to ascertain the quantum of unjust
profits gained by Defendant;
E. For an order of damages to the Plaintiff to the tune of Rs.2,00,00,400/- damage caused to the
Plaintiff's brand equity, goodwill and reputation may be passed in favour of the Plaintiff and against
the Defendant. If this Hon'ble Court directs a rendition of accounts, the Plaintiff undertakes to pay
further court fees once the sum is ascertained on the Defendant's rendering true and proper
accounts.;"
3. It is the case of the plaintiff that the plaintiff is a partnership firm and is the proprietor of the
registered trade mark 'LIBERTY', amongst several other trade marks. Mr. Dheeraj Gupta, the Sole
Proprietor of the defendant, is a partner of the plaintiff firm, however, he does not have any
personal rights in the plaintiff's registered trade mark 'LIBERTY' in any manner whatsoever.
4. It is further claimed that Mr. Dheeraj Gupta is the youngest son of Mr. Harish Kumar Gupta, also
a partner of the plaintiff firm.
5. It is alleged that the plaintiff has granted an exclusive license vide an Exclusive License
Agreement dated 31.03.2003 in favour of 'M/s Liberty Shoes Limited' for the use of the mark
'LIBERTY' and its many variants. Mr. Dheeraj Gupta is also a shareholder in the said company/
exclusive licensee.
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number
2023/DHC/000153
6. It is further alleged that Mr. Dheeraj Gupta is a family member of Mr. Adarsh Gupta, the
Managing Partner of the plaintiff's firm, on whose authorization the present plaint has been filed. It
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187367970/
2
is claimed that the parties tried to amicably settle the issues between them, however, the same has
failed.
7. It is alleged that the defendant is unauthorizedly using the plaintiff's trade mark 'LIBERTY' in the
following manner:
" a. Incorporated LIBERTY in its trade name "LIBERTY INTERNATIONAL"
(hereinafter referred as "impugned trade name") for competing business of footwear.
b. Manufacturing, trading, importing and marketing identical products i.e. footwear
using Plaintiff's registered trademarks LIBERTY and c. Affixing the Plaintiff's
registered trademarks LIBERTY and on its products and packaging.
d. Using the Plaintiffs registered trademark LIBERTY individually on identical
products i.e. shoes/footwear.
e. Operating infringing email id libertyshoes@live.com."
8. For the purposes of the present application, I may not go further into the case set up by the
plaintiff.
CASE OF THE DEFENDANT/APPLICANT
9. As noted hereinabove, the defendant has filed the present application praying that as the dispute
raised by the plaintiff is one inter se amongst the partners of the firms and arising out of the
Partnership Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation
Number 2023/DHC/000153 Deed dated 08.09.2003, the parties should be referred to arbitration
in terms of Clause 14 of the Partnership Deed.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PLAINTIFF
10. The learned senior counsel for the plaintiff asserts that as the present Suit claims relief under the
Trade Marks Act, 1999 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Trade Marks Act'), the same cannot be
referred to arbitration. In support he places reliance on the following judgments: -
a) Steel Authority of India Ltd. v. SKS Ispat and Power Ltd. and Ors., 2014 SCC
OnLine Bom 4875;
b) A. Ayyasamy v. A. Paramasivam and Others, (2016) 10 SCC 386;
c) Indian Performing Right Society Ltd. v. Entertainment Network (India) Ltd., 2016
SCC OnLine Bom 5893;
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187367970/
3
d) Eros International Media Limited v. Telemax Links India Pvt. Ltd. and Others.,
2016 SCC OnLine Bom 2179
11. The learned counsel for the plaintiff submits that under Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act, a
suit for infringement cannot be instituted before a Court inferior to a District Court, therefore, by
implication, a relief for infringement of a trade mark cannot be adjudicated upon by an Arbitrator.
12. Placing reliance on various provisions of the Partnership Act, 1932 (hereinafter referred to as the
'Partnership Act'), he submits that the plaintiff has distinct rights under the Trade Marks Act and
the Partnership Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral
Citation Number 2023/DHC/000153 Act. Where the plaintiff makes claims under the Trade Marks
Act, the Arbitration Agreement shall have no application; whereas, if the plaintiff chooses to exercise
the rights under the Partnership Act, arbitration would be the remedy.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE DEFENDANT
13. On the other hand, the learned counsel for the defendant submits that in the present case, there
is no dispute that the plaintiff is the proprietor of the trade marks. In fact, the defendant has, of its
own accord, stopped using the logo ' ' of the plaintiff, which is one of the claims made in the suit. He
submits that, therefore, the only dispute left between the parties is as to whether the partnership can
be represented by Mr. Adarsh Gupta, and whether the defendant, who is one of the partners of the
plaintiff firm, can use the marks of the plaintiff firm.
14. He submits that, therefore, there is no dispute in rem to be adjudicated and arbitration would be
the proper remedy. In support he places reliance on the following judgments:-
a) Hero Electric Vehicles Private Limited and Anr. v. Lectro E- Mobility Private
Limited and Anr., 2021 SCC OnLine Del 1058;
b) Chem Academy Pvt. Ltd. v. Praveen Malik, 2022 SCC OnLine Del 2414;
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number
2023/DHC/000153
c) Hindustan Petroleum Corpn. Ltd. v. Pinkcity Midway Petroleums, (2003) 6 SCC 503,;
d) Golden Tobie Private Limited v. Golden Tobacco Limited, 2021 SCC OnLine Del 3029;
e) Vimi Verma v. Sanjay Verma and Ors., 2013 SCC OnLine Del 4194; and
f) Lifestyle Equities CV v. Q.D. Seatoman Design Pvt. Ltd. and Ors., 2019 SCC OnLine Mad 38921;
15. The learned counsel for the defendant further submits that in view of Section 8 of the Arbitration
Act, this Court cannot enter into the merits of the disputes raised between the parties, even for the
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187367970/
4
purposes of consideration of a prayer for grant of an interim injunction. In case, the present
application is to be allowed, the parties have to be relegated to arbitration without expressing any
opinion on the merits of the claims raised by the parties. In support he places reliance on the
following judgments:-
a) Learonal and Another v. R.B. Business Promotions Private Limited and Another,
(2010) 15 SCC 733;
b) Jagdish Raj & Brothers v. Jagdish Raj and Ors., 2002 SCC OnLine P&H 852;
c) Sundaram Finance Limited and Ors. v. T. Thankam, (2015) 14 SCC 444;
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number
2023/DHC/000153 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS
16. I have considered the submissions made by the learned counsels for the parties.
17. From the reading of the plaint itself, it is evident that the plaintiff has filed the Suit through one
of the partners in the plaintiff firm. The defendant is the sole proprietorship concern of one of the
other partners in the plaintiff firm. The defendant also does not deny the proprietary rights of the
plaintiff in the mark 'LIBERTY', including its variants and the logo. The dispute to be determined in
the Suit, therefore, is whether the proprietor of the defendant, who is also a partner in the plaintiff
firm, is entitled to use the marks of the plaintiff firm.
18. Clause 14 of the Partnership Deed dated 08.09.2003 contains the Arbitration Agreement
between the partners of the plaintiff firm, and is reproduced hereinunder:-
"14. ARBITRATION That in case of any dispute between the parties with regard to
the interpretation of this deed or any other matter relating to the affairs of the firm,
the same shall be referred to an arbitrator mutually agreed upon between the parties
in accordance with the provisions of the Indian Arbitration Act."
(Emphasis Supplied)
19. In Vidya Drolia and Others vs. Durga Trading Corporation, (2021) 2 SCC 1, the
Supreme Court (Justice Sanjiv Khanna speaking for the Bench) answered the
following questions:-
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number
2023/DHC/000153 "2. A deeper consideration of the order of reference reveals that the issues
required to be answered relate to two aspects that are distinct and yet interconnected, namely:
2.1 (i) meaning of non-arbitrability and when the subject-matter of the dispute is not capable of
being resolved through arbitration. 2.2. (ii) the conundrum - "who decides" - whether the court at
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187367970/
5
the reference stage or the Arbitral Tribunal in the arbitration proceedings would decide the question
of non-arbitrability. 2.3 The second aspect also relates to the scope and ambit of jurisdiction of the
court at the referral stage when an objection of non- arbitrability is raised to an application under
Section 8 or 11 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short, the "Arbitration Act")."
20. In answering the above issues, the Supreme Court held as under:-
"46. Having examined and analysed the judgments, we would coalesce and crystalise
the legal principles for determining non-arbitrability. We begin by drawing principles
that draw distinction between adjudication of actions in rem and adjudication of
actions in personam.
47. A judgment is a formal expression of conclusive adjudication of the rights and
liabilities of the parties. The judgment may operate in two ways, in rem or in
personam. Section 41 of the Evidence Act, 1872 on the question of relevancy of
judgments in the context of conclusiveness of a judgment, order or decree provides:
"41. Relevancy of certain judgments in probate, etc. jurisdiction.--A final judgment,
order or decree of a competent court, in the exercise of probate, matrimonial,
admiralty or insolvency jurisdiction, which confers upon or takes away from any
person any legal character, or which declares any person to be entitled to any such
character, or to be entitled to any specific thing, not as against any Signature Not
Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number
2023/DHC/000153 specified person but absolutely, is relevant when the existence of
any such legal character, or the title of any such person to any such thing, is relevant.
Such judgment, order or decree is conclusive proof--
that any legal character, which it confers accrued at the time when such judgment,
order or decree came into operation;
that any legal character, to which it declares any such person to be entitled, accrued
to that person at the time when such judgment, order or decree declares it to have
accrued to that person; that any legal character which it takes away from any such
person ceased at the time from which such judgment, order or decree declared that it
had ceased or should cease; and that anything to which it declares any person to be so
entitled was the property of that person at the time from which such judgment, order
or decree declares that it had been or should be his property."
48. A judgment in rem determines the status of a person or thing as distinct from the
particular interest in it of a party to the litigation; and such a judgment is conclusive
evidence for and against all persons whether parties, privies or strangers of the
matter actually decided. Such a judgment "settles the destiny of the res itself" and
binds all persons claiming an interest in the property inconsistent with the judgment
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187367970/
6
even though pronounced in their absence. [ G.C. Cheshire & P.M. North, Private
International Law, 12th Edn. by North & Fawcett (Eds.) (London :
Butterworths, 1992), p. 362.] By contrast, a judgment in personam, "although it may
concern a res, merely determines the rights of the litigants inter se to the res". [ G.C.
Cheshire & P.M.
North, Private International Law, 12th Edn. by North & Fawcett (Eds.) (London : Butterworths,
1992), p. 362.] Distinction between judgments in rem and judgments in personam turns on their
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number
2023/DHC/000153 power as res judicata, [ G.C. Cheshire & P.M. North, Private International Law,
12th Edn. by North & Fawcett (Eds.) (London : Butterworths, 1992).] i.e. judgment in rem would
operate as res judicata against the world, and judgment in personam would operate as res judicata
only against the parties in dispute. Use of expressions "rights in rem" and "rights in personam" may
not be correct for determining non-arbitrability because of the interplay between rights in rem and
rights in personam. Many a times, a right in rem results in an enforceable right in personam. Booz
Allen & Hamilton Inc. v. SBI Home Finance Ltd., (2011) 5 SCC 532, refers to the statement by
Mustill and Boyd that the subordinate rights in personam derived from rights in rem can be ruled
upon by the arbitrators, which is apposite. Therefore, a claim for infringement of copyright against a
particular person is arbitrable, though in some manner the arbitrator would examine the right to
copyright, a right in rem. Arbitration by necessary implication excludes actions in rem.
49. Exclusion of actions in rem from arbitration, exposits the intrinsic limits of arbitration as a
private dispute resolution mechanism, which is only binding on "the parties" to the arbitration
agreement. The courts established by law on the other hand enjoy jurisdiction by default and do not
require mutual agreement for conferring jurisdiction. The Arbitral Tribunals not being courts of law
or established under the auspices of the State cannot act judicially so as to affect those who are not
bound by the arbitration clause. Arbitration is unsuitable when it has erga omnes effect, that is, it
affects the rights and liabilities of persons who are not bound by the arbitration agreement. Equally
arbitration as a decentralised mode of dispute resolution is unsuitable when the subject-matter or a
dispute in the factual background, requires collective adjudication before one court or forum.
Certain disputes as a class, or sometimes the dispute in the given facts, can be efficiently resolved
only through collective litigation proceedings.
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number
2023/DHC/000153 Contractual and consensual nature of arbitration underpins its ambit and
scope. Authority and power being derived from an agreement cannot bind and is non-effective
against non-signatories. An arbitration agreement between two or more parties would be limpid and
inexpedient in situations when the subject-matter or dispute affects the rights and interests of third
parties or without presence of others, an effective and enforceable award is not possible. Prime
objective of arbitration to secure just, fair and effective resolution of disputes, without unnecessary
delay and with least expense, is crippled and mutilated when the rights and liabilities of persons
who have not consented to arbitration are affected or the collective resolution of the disputes by
including non-parties is required. Arbitration agreement as an alternative to public fora should not
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187367970/
7
be enforced when it is futile, ineffective, and would be a no result exercise. [ Prof. Stavros
Brekoulakis, "On Arbitrability : Persisting Misconceptions and New Areas of Concern" essay in the
edited collection, Arbitrability :
International and Comparative Perspectives(Kluwer, 2009) pp. 19-45.]
50. Sovereign functions of the State being inalienable and non-delegable are non-arbitrable as the
State alone has the exclusive right and duty to perform such functions. [ Ajar Raib, "Defining
Contours of the Public Policy Exception -- A New Test for Arbitrability", Indian Journal for
Arbitration Law, Vol. 7 (2018) p. 161.] For example, it is generally accepted that monopoly rights can
only be granted by the State. Correctness and validity of the State or sovereign functions cannot be
made a direct subject-matter of a private adjudicatory process. Sovereign functions for the purpose
of Arbitration Act would extend to exercise of executive power in different fields including
commerce and economic, legislation in all forms, taxation, eminent domain and police powers
which includes maintenance of law and order, internal security, grant of pardon, etc. as
distinguished from commercial activities, Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA
NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number 2023/DHC/000153 economic adventures and welfare
activities. [Common Cause v. Union of India, (1999) 6 SCC 667 : 1999 SCC (Cri) 119 and Agricultural
Produce Market Committee v. Ashok Harikuni, (2000) 8 SCC 61.] Similarly, decisions and
adjudicatory functions of the State that have public interest element like the legitimacy of marriage,
citizenship, winding up of companies, grant of patents, etc. are non-arbitrable, unless the statute in
relation to a regulatory or adjudicatory mechanism either expressly or by clear implication permits
arbitration. In these matters the State enjoys monopoly in dispute resolution.
xxxx
53. Dhulabhai v. State of M.P., (1968) 3 SCR 662, is not directly applicable as it relates to exclusion
of jurisdiction of civil courts, albeit we respectfully agree with the order of reference that Condition 2
is apposite while examining the question of non-arbitrability. Implied legislative intention to
exclude arbitration can be seen if it appears that the statute creates a special right or a liability and
provides for determination of the right and liability to be dealt with by the specified courts or the
tribunals specially constituted in that behalf and further lays down that all questions about the said
right and liability shall be determined by the court or tribunals so empowered and vested with
exclusive jurisdiction. Therefore, mere creation of a specific forum as a substitute for civil court or
specifying the civil court, may not be enough to accept the inference of implicit non-arbitrability.
Conferment of jurisdiction on a specific court or creation of a public forum though eminently
significant, may not be the decisive test to answer and decide whether arbitrability is impliedly
barred.
54. Implicit non-arbitrability is established when by mandatory law the parties are quintessentially
barred from contracting out and waiving the adjudication by the designated court or the specified
public forum. There is no choice. The Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI
18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number 2023/DHC/000153 person who insists on the remedy must seek
his remedy before the forum stated in the statute and before no other forum. In Transcore v. Union
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187367970/
8
of India, (2008) 1 SCC 125, this Court had examined the doctrine of election in the context whether
an order under proviso to Section 19(1) of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial
Institutions Act, 1993 ("the DRT Act") is a condition precedent to taking recourse to the
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act,
2002 ("the NPA Act"). For analysing the scope and remedies under the two Acts, it was held that the
NPA Act is an additional remedy which is not inconsistent with the DRT Act, and reference was
made to the doctrine of election in the following terms : (Transcore case p. 162, para 64) "64. In the
light of the above discussion, we now examine the doctrine of election. There are three elements of
election, namely, existence of two or more remedies; inconsistencies between such remedies and a
choice of one of them. If any one of the three elements is not there, the doctrine will not apply.
According to American Jurisprudence, 2d, Vol. 25, p. 652, if in truth there is only one remedy, then
the doctrine of election does not apply. In the present case, as stated above, the NPA Act is an
additional remedy to the DRT Act. Together they constitute one remedy and, therefore, the doctrine
of election does not apply. Even according to Snell's Principles of Equity (31st Edn., p. 119), the
doctrine of election of remedies is applicable only when there are two or more co-existent remedies
available to the litigants at the time of election which are repugnant and inconsistent. In any event,
there is no repugnancy nor inconsistency between the two remedies, therefore, the doctrine of
election has no application."
55. Doctrine of election to select arbitration as a dispute resolution mechanism by mutual
agreement is available only if the law accepts existence of arbitration as an alternative remedy and
freedom to choose is available. There should not be any inconsistency or repugnancy between
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number
2023/DHC/000153 the provisions of the mandatory law and arbitration as an alternative.
Conversely, and in a given case when there is repugnancy and inconsistency, the right of choice and
election to arbitrate is denied. This requires examining the "text of the statute, the legislative
history, and "inherent conflict" between arbitration and the statute's underlying purpose" [ Jennifer
L. Peresie, "Reducing the Presumption of Arbitrability" 22 Yale Law & Policy Review, Vol. 22, Issue
2 (Spring 2004), pp. 453-462.] with reference to the nature and type of special rights conferred and
power and authority given to the courts or public forum to effectuate and enforce these rights and
the orders passed. When arbitration cannot enforce and apply such rights or the award cannot be
implemented and enforced in the manner as provided and mandated by law, the right of election to
choose arbitration in preference to the courts or public forum is either completely denied or could
be curtailed. In essence, it is necessary to examine if the statute creates a special right or liability and
provides for the determination of each right or liability by the specified court or the public forum so
constituted, and whether the remedies beyond the ordinary domain of the civil courts are
prescribed. When the answer is affirmative, arbitration in the absence of special reason is
contraindicated. The dispute is non-arbitrable.
xxxx
67. Public policy in the context of non- arbitrability refers to public policy as reflected in the
enactment, that is, whether the enactment confers exclusive jurisdiction to the specified court or the
special forum and prohibits recourse to arbitration. Public policy in the context of sub- clause (ii) to
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187367970/
9
Section 34(2)(b) refers to the public policy of the enactment, defining and fixing rights and
obligations, and application of those rights and obligations by the arbitrator.
68. Statutes unfailingly have a public purpose or policy which is the basis and purpose behind the
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number
2023/DHC/000153 legislation. Application of mandatory law to the merits of the case do not imply
that the right to arbitrate is taken away. Mandatory law may require a particular substantive rule to
be applied, but this would not preclude arbitration. Implied non-arbitrability requires prohibition
against waiver of jurisdiction, which happens when a statute gives special rights or obligations and
creates or stipulates an exclusive forum for adjudication and enforcement. An arbitrator, like the
court, is equally bound by the public policy behind the statute while examining the claim on merits.
The public policy in case of non- arbitrability would relate to conferment of exclusive jurisdiction on
the court or the special forum set up by law for decision making. Non- arbitrability question cannot
be answered by examining whether the statute has a public policy objective which invariably every
statute would have. There is a general presumption in favour of arbitrability, which is not excluded
simply because the dispute is permeated by applicability of mandatory law. Violation of public policy
by the arbitrator could well result in setting aside the award on the ground of failure to follow the
fundamental policy of law in India, but not on the ground that the subject-matter of the dispute was
non-arbitrable.
xxxx
76. In view of the above discussion, we would like to propound a fourfold test for determining when
the subject-matter of a dispute in an arbitration agreement is not arbitrable: 76.1. (1) When cause of
action and subject-matter of the dispute relates to actions in rem, that do not pertain to subordinate
rights in personam that arise from rights in rem.
76.2. (2) When cause of action and subject-matter of the dispute affects third-party rights; have erga
omnes effect; require centralised adjudication, and mutual adjudication would not be appropriate
and enforceable.
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number
2023/DHC/000153 76.3. (3) When cause of action and subject-matter of the dispute relates to
inalienable sovereign and public interest functions of the State and hence mutual adjudication
would be unenforceable. 76.4. (4) When the subject-matter of the dispute is expressly or by
necessary implication non- arbitrable as per mandatory statute(s). 76.5. These tests are not
watertight compartments; they dovetail and overlap, albeit when applied holistically and
pragmatically will help and assist in determining and ascertaining with great degree of certainty
when as per law in India, a dispute or subject-matter is non- arbitrable. Only when the answer is
affirmative that the subject-matter of the dispute would be non-arbitrable.
76.6. However, the aforesaid principles have to be applied with care and caution as observed in
Olympus Superstructures (P) Ltd., (199) 5 SCC 651:
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187367970/
10
"35...Reference is made there to certain disputes like criminal offences of a public nature, disputes
arising out of illegal agreements and disputes relating to status, such as divorce, which cannot be
referred to arbitration. It has, however, been held that if in respect of facts relating to a criminal
matter, say, physical injury, if there is a right to damages for personal injury, then such a dispute can
be referred to arbitration (Keir v. Leeman, (1846) 9 QB 371). Similarly, it has been held that a
husband and a wife may refer to arbitration the terms on which they shall separate, because they can
make a valid agreement between themselves on that matter (Soilleux v. Herbst, (1801) 2 Bos & P
444, Wilson v. Wilson, (1848) 1 HL Cas 538, and Cahill v. Cahill, (1883) LR 8 AC 420 (HL))."
(Emphasis Supplied)
21. In his Supplementing Opinion, Justice N.V. Ramana, held as under:-
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number
2023/DHC/000153 "225. From a study of the above precedents, the following conclusion, with
respect to adjudication of subject-matter arbitrability under Section 8 or 11 of the Act, are pertinent:
225.1. In line with the categories laid down by the earlier judgment of Boghara Polyfab [National
Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Boghara Polyfab, the courts were examining "subject-matter arbitrability" at
the pre-arbitral stage, prior to the 2015 Amendment.
225.2. Post the 2015 Amendment, judicial interference at the reference stage has been substantially
curtailed.
225.3. Although subject-matter arbitrability and public policy objections are provided separately
under Section 34 of the Act, the courts herein have understood the same to be interchangeable
under the Act. Further, subject-matter arbitrability is interlinked with in rem rights.
225.4. There are special classes of rights and privileges, which enure to the benefit of a citizen, by
virtue of constitutional or legislative instrument, which may affect the arbitrability of a
subject-matter.
226. It may be noted that the Act itself does not exclude any category of disputes as being non-
arbitrable. However, the courts have used the "public policy" reason to restrict arbitration with
respect to certain subject-matters. In line with the aforesaid proposition, the courts have interfered
with the subject-matter arbitrability at the pre- reference stage.
227. However, post the 2015 Amendment, the structure of the Act was changed to bring it in tune
with the pro-arbitration approach. Under the amended provision, the court can only give prima
facie opinion on the existence of a valid arbitration agreement. In line with the amended language
and the statutory scheme, the Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59
Neutral Citation Number 2023/DHC/000153 examination of the subject-matter arbitrability may
not be appropriate at the stage of reference under Section 8 of the Arbitration Act. It is more
appropriate to be taken up by the court at the stage of enforcement under Section 34 of the Act.
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187367970/
11
Having said so, in clear cases where the subject- matter arbitrability is clearly barred, the court can
cut the deadwood to preserve the efficacy of the arbitral process.
228. At this stage a word of caution needs to be said for arbitrators. They have been given
jurisdiction to decide on the subject-matter arbitrability. They are required to identify specific public
policy in order to determine the subject- matter arbitrability. Merely because a matter verges on a
prohibited territory, should not by in itself stop the arbitrator from deciding the matter. He/she
should be careful in considering the question of non-arbitrability.
xxxxx
244. Before we part, the conclusions reached, with respect to Question 1, are:
244.1. Sections 8 and 11 of the Act have the same ambit with respect to judicial interference.
244.2. Usually, subject-matter arbitrability cannot be decided at the stage of Section 8 or 11 of the
Act, unless it is a clear case of deadwood.
244.3. The court, under Sections 8 and 11, has to refer a matter to arbitration or to appoint an
arbitrator, as the case may be, unless a party has established a prima facie (summary findings) case
of non-existence of valid arbitration agreement, by summarily portraying a strong case that he is
entitled to such a finding.
244.4. The court should refer a matter if the validity of the arbitration agreement cannot be
determined on a prima facie basis, as laid down above i.e. "when in doubt, do refer".
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number
2023/DHC/000153 244.5. The scope of the court to examine the prima facie validity of an
arbitration agreement includes only:
244.5.1. Whether the arbitration agreement was in writing? Or 244.5.2. Whether the arbitration
agreement was contained in exchange of letters, telecommunication, etc.?
244.5.3. Whether the core contractual ingredients qua the arbitration agreement were fulfilled?
244.5.4. On rare occasions, whether the subject- matter of dispute is arbitrable?"
(Emphasis Supplied)
22. The Supreme Court has, therefore, held that a distinction is to be drawn between an action in
personam, that is, actions which determine the rights and interests of the parties themselves in the
subject-matter of the case, and actions in rem, which refer to actions determining the title to the
property and the rights of the parties, not merely among themselves but also against all persons at
any time claiming an interest in that property. While rights in personam are amenable to
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187367970/
12
arbitration, disputes in rem are required to be adjudicated by the Courts and Public Tribunals,
therefore, being unsuitable for private arbitration. However, disputes relating to subordinate rights
in personam arising from rights in rem are considered to be arbitrable. The Supreme Court, in fact,
gives an example stating that rights under a patent license may be arbitrated, but the validity of the
underline patent may not be arbitrable; similarly, a claim for infringement of copyright against a
particular person is arbitrable, Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59
Neutral Citation Number 2023/DHC/000153 though in some manner the arbitrator would examine
the right to copyright, a right in rem.
23. I must herein also refer to the following observations of Justice Sanjiv Khanna in Vidya Drolia
and Others (supra), which was relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the plaintiff:
"77. Applying the above principles to determine non-arbitrability, it is apparent that
insolvency or intracompany disputes have to be addressed by a centralised forum, be
the court or a special forum, which would be more efficient and has complete
jurisdiction to efficaciously and fully dispose of the entire matter. They are also
actions in rem. Similarly, grant and issue of patents and registration of trade marks
are exclusive matters falling within the sovereign or government functions and have
erga omnes effect. Such grants confer monopoly rights. They are non-arbitrable.
Criminal cases again are not arbitrable as they relate to sovereign functions of the
State. Further, violations of criminal law are offences against the State and not just
against the victim. Matrimonial disputes relating to the dissolution of marriage,
restitution of conjugal rights, etc. are not arbitrable as they fall within the ambit of
sovereign functions and do not have any commercial and economic value. The
decisions have erga omnes effect. Matters relating to probate, testamentary matter
etc. are actions in rem and are a declaration to the world at large and hence are
non-arbitrable."
(Emphasis Supplied)
24. The above observation of the Supreme Court, however, would not be applicable in
the present case, as the present Suit does not relate to an issue of 'grant or issue of or
registration of trade mark'. The present suit is for enforcement of such a right, not
against a third party which is a Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA
NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number 2023/DHC/000153 total stranger to the
registered proprietor of the trademark, but someone who claims (whether rightly or
wrongly) a right to use the trademark under or through the registered proprietor of
the trademark. In fact, as noted hereinabove, the defendant does not even dispute the
plaintiff to be the proprietor of the marks in question. What would govern the present
dispute would, therefore, be the observations of the Supreme Court which state that
where the claim in the Suit is the enforceability of rights in personam, flowing out of
a right in rem, by virtue of the plaintiff being the proprietor of the said marks, the
parties are to be referred to arbitration.
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187367970/
13
25. This Court in Hero Electric Vehicles Private Limited and Ors. (supra), following the ratio of
Vidya Drolia and Others (supra), held as under:-
" 3 9 .  T h e  f o l l o w i n g  c l e a r  p r i n c i p l e s  e m e r g e ,  f r o m  V i d y a  D r o l i a
MANU/SC/0939/2020, insofar as Section 8 is concerned:
xxxx
(iv) The arbitrability of the dispute forming subject matter of the suit, and the
arbitrability of the claim, are different. A claim may be non- arbitrable because of the
scope of the arbitration agreement, not because the subject matter of the claim is
essentially not amenable to arbitration. On the other hand, the subject matter of the
suit is normally non-arbitrable only if it is not amenable to resolution by arbitration,
in law.
(v) Non-arbitrability may be said to exist
(a) where the cause of action, and the subject matter of the dispute, related to actions in rem, which
do not pertain to Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral
Citation Number 2023/DHC/000153 subordinate rights in personam arising from rights in rem,
(b) where the cause of action and subject matter of the dispute affects third party rights, or has erga
omnes effect, i.e. affects rights owed to all,
(c) where the cause of action and subject matter of the dispute require centralised adjudication, and
for which mutual adjudication would not be appropriate or enforceable,
(d) where the cause of action and subject matter of the dispute relate to inalienable sovereign and
public interest functions of the State, not amenable to adjudication by the arbitral process, or
(e) where the subject matter of the dispute is non- arbitrable by mandatory statutory fiat.
These principles are, however, not watertight, and have to be applied with care and caution.
(vi) Specific instances of non-arbitrable disputes are
(c) grant and issue of patents and registration of trademarks being exclusive matters falling within
the sovereign or government function, having erga omnes effect, conferring monopoly rights,"
(Emphasis Supplied)
26. In Golden Tobie Private Limited (supra), this Court reiterated as under:-
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187367970/
14
"15. It is clear that the aforenoted judgment of the co-ordinate Bench of this court
applies on all fours to the facts of the present case. The court Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number
2023/DHC/000153 held that the dispute did not pertain to infringement of a
trademark on the ground that the defendants are using a deceptively similar
trademark. The ground was that the right to use the trademark was conferred by a
particular agreement on a particular group of the family. Even if the plaintiff in that
case were to rely on any provisions of the Trademark Act the essential infraction as
allegedly committed by the defendant was not the provisions of the Trademark Act
but the provisions of the agreements in question. The dispute which emanates out of
the agreement between the parties was held to be arbitrable. The court also clarified
that the controversy in the said case did not relate to grant or registration of
trademarks. The said trademarks stood granted and registered. It was also held that
assignment of a trademark is by a contract and is not a statutory fiat. It does not
involve any exercise of sovereign functions.
16. It is manifest from the facts of this case as narrated above that the dispute in
question primarily relates to interpretation of the terms of the Agreement dated
12.02.2020 and the amendment agreement dated 29.08.2020 executed between the
parties and as to whether the termination of the said agreements by the defendant
and cancellation of the assignment of the trademark in favour of the plaintiffs is legal
and valid. The right that is asserted by the plaintiff is not a right that emanates from
the Trademark Act but a right that emanates from the Agreement dated 12.02.2020
and the amendment agreement dated 29.08.2020. The assignment of trademark is
by a contract and not by a statutory act. It does not involve any exercise of sovereign
functions of the State. It cannot be said that the disputes are not arbitrable. The pleas
of learned senior counsel for the plaintiff are clearly without merit. The reasons spelt
out by the plaintiff for not referring the matter to arbitration are misplaced and
without merits."
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number
2023/DHC/000153
27. The plea of the learned senior counsel for the plaintiff that as Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act
prescribes that a suit for infringement shall not lie in a Court inferior to a District Court, arbitration
would be implicitly barred, cannot also be accepted. In Vidya Drolia and Others (supra), the
Supreme Court while considering the issue of implied ouster of arbitration on account of a statute
providing for a specific Civil Court to adjudicate on the rights and liabilities arising out the statute,
observed as under: -
"53......Implied legislative intention to exclude arbitration can be seen if it appears
that the statute creates a special right or a liability and provides for determination of
the right and liability to be dealt with by the specified courts or the tribunals specially
constituted in that behalf and further lays down that all questions about the said right
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187367970/
15
and liability shall be determined by the court or tribunals so empowered and vested
with exclusive jurisdiction. Therefore, mere creation of a specific forum as a
substitute for civil court or specifying the civil court, may not be enough to accept the
inference of implicit non-arbitrability. Conferment of jurisdiction on a specific court
or creation of a public forum though eminently significant, may not be the decisive
test to answer and decide whether arbitrability is impliedly barred."
(Emphasis Supplied)
28. In the present case, Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act does not totally exclude
the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts to entertain and adjudicate upon a claim of the
infringement of a trade mark. It merely provides that such claim cannot be
adjudicated upon by a Court inferior to the Court of a District Judge. The Trade
Marks Act, therefore, does not create any specific forum as far as suits for
infringement of a trade mark Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA
NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number 2023/DHC/000153 are concerned as a
substitute for a Civil Court. As held by the Supreme Court in Vidya Drolia and Others
(supra), merely specifying which Civil Court is to adjudicate such disputes may not be
enough to accept the inference of implicit non-arbitrability of such disputes.
29. In Eros International Media Limited (supra), the High Court of Bombay negated the submission
that Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act would impliedly bar arbitration, by observing as under: -
"16. Section 62 of the Copyright Act 1957 corresponds almost exactly to Section 134 of
the Trade Marks Act, 1999: infringement and passing off actions cannot be brought
in a court lower than a jurisdictionally competent District Court, one within whose
limits the plaintiff resides or works for gain. I do not think these sections can be read
as ousting the jurisdiction of an arbitral panel. All that they mean is that such actions
are not to be brought before the registrar or the board, viz., an authority set up by
either of those statutes. In fact, Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999, correctly
read, answers in full Mr. Dhond's case of having to pursue a remedy given by statute
in a particular forum; for that section contains the same provision as regards trade
mark passing off actions and it is well settled that an action in passing off is not in
pursuit of a statutory remedy but one in common law. It is a mistake, I think, to see
these so-called 'intellectual property' statutes as relating to rights that stand wholly
apart from the general body of law. These are special rights to be sure, but they are, at
their heart, a species of property and share much with their more tangible cousins to
whom acts such as the Sale of Goods Act or the Transfer of Property Act apply. Even
those acts confer certain 'rights';
and the registration of a document of title to land (or, for that matter, to a motor scooter) is also in
one sense a right against the world, i.e., any other who would lay claim to it. I see no material
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number
2023/DHC/000153 distinction between in this regard between being the owner of land and the
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187367970/
16
proprietor of a mark. What Sections 62 of the Copyright Act, 1957 and the Trade Marks Act, 1999
seem to do, I believe, is to define the entry level of such actions in our judicial hierarchy. They confer
no exclusivity, and it is not possible from such sections, common to many statutes, to infer the
ouster of an entire statute. These sections do not themselves define arbitrability or non-arbitrability.
For that, we must have regard to the nature of the claim that is made."
30. In Steel Authority of India Ltd. (supra), the High Court of Bombay held as under:-
"4. The present suit, firstly, is for reliefs against infringement and passing off, which
by their very nature do not fall within the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator. The rights to
a trademark and remedies in connection therewith are matters in rem and by their
very nature not amenable to the jurisdiction of private forum chosen by the parties.
Secondly, the disputes concerning infringement and passing off do not arise out of
the contract between the parties dated 1 June 2011, which contains the arbitration
agreement. Thirdly, there are other parties who are arraigned as party Defendants to
the present suit, who are not parties to the arbitration agreement contained in the
contract dated 1 June 2011."
31. The above observations are clearly no longer good law in view of the judgment of the Supreme
Court in Vidya Drolia and Others (supra).
32. The judgment of A. Ayyasamy (supra), relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the plaintiff,
has been extensively considered by the judgment of Vidya Drolia and Others (supra) and I,
therefore, would not dare to revisit the said exercise; suffice it to say, even the said judgment
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number
2023/DHC/000153 does not hold that merely because a claim of a right in a trademark is made,
arbitration shall stand ousted.
33. In The Indian Performing Right Society Ltd. (supra), the High Court of Bombay was considering
a case wherein the claimant in the arbitration proceedings had specifically denied that the
respondent had any copyright in relation to pre-recorded sound recording and, therefore, denied
that the respondent had any right to collect any license fee or royalty in respect thereof. It was in
that light that the High Court held that the disputes being one in rem, could not have been made
subject-matter of arbitration. It was in those peculiar facts, and as rights in rem were being
determined, that the High Court held that the dispute was not arbitrable. Though in passing, the
High Court also placed reliance on Section 62 (1) of the Copyright Act, 1957, which provides that a
suit for infringement for copyright in any work shall be instituted in the District Court having
jurisdiction, to hold that arbitration was not maintainable, in my opinion, the said view would not
be correct in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Vidya Drolia (supra).
34. The submission of the learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff that the plaintiff having chosen
the remedy under the Trade Marks Act and not one under the Partnership Act and, therefore,
cannot be relegated to arbitration, cannot also be accepted. As held by the Supreme Court in Vidya
Drolia (supra), the doctrine of election of remedies is applicable only where there are two or more
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187367970/
17
remedies available to the litigants at the time of election which are repugnant and inconsistent. In
the present case, there is no inconsistency or repugnancy shown to exist between the Signature Not
Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number 2023/DHC/000153
rights of the plaintiff under the Trade Marks Act and the Partnership Act. The plaintiff cannot
breach the arbitration agreement merely by framing the Suit as one under the Trade Marks Act.
35. Sub-Section 1 of Section 8 of the Arbitration Act reads as under:-
"8. Power to refer parties to arbitration where there is an arbitration agreement.--
[(1) A judicial authority, before which an action is brought in a matter which is the
subject of an arbitration agreement shall, if a party to the arbitration agreement or
any person claiming through or under him, so applies not later than the date of
submitting his first statement on the substance of the dispute, then, notwithstanding
any judgment, decree or order of the Supreme Court or any Court, refer the parties to
arbitration unless it finds that prima facie no valid arbitration agreement exists."
36. In Vidya Drolia and Others (supra), the Supreme Court also considered the issue of 'Who
Decides Non-arbitrability?'. As noted hereinabove, the Supreme Court held that the referral Court
under Section 8 of the Arbitration Act, without getting bogged down, would compel the parties to
abide by the Arbitration Agreement unless there are good and substantial reasons to the contrary.
Prima facie examination is not fully a review, but a primary first review to weed out manifestly and
ex facie non-existent and invalid arbitration agreements and non- arbitrable disputes. It is only
where the Court is certain that no valid Arbitration Agreement exists or the disputes/subject-matter
are not arbitrable, the application under Section 8 of the Arbitration Act would be rejected. As
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ramana concluded, 'when in doubt, do refer'.
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number
2023/DHC/000153
37. Applying the above principles to the facts of the present case, the present application filed by the
defendant under Section 8 of the Arbitration Act deserves to be allowed. In the present case, the
disputes that would have to be referred to be adjudicated through arbitration. It would have to be
determined as to whether the defendant, who is the partner in the plaintiff firm, can use the trade
marks of the plaintiff's firm for his own sole proprietorship concern. The learned counsel for the
defendant also claims that there exists an understanding between the partners of the plaintiff firm
wherein all the members of the family are permitted to use the plaintiff firm's trade mark 'LIBERTY'
for their respective businesses. The same would also be required to be adjudicated by the learned
Arbitrator. The effect of the Partnership Act; the terms of the Partnership Agreement; the effect of
the registration of the trademarks in favour of the plaintiff; and their licence on exclusive basis to
'M/s Liberty Shoes Limited', can all be considered by the arbitrator. As noticed hereinabove, the
disputes between the parties would, therefore, flow from the Partnership Deed dated 08.09.2003.
38. In P. Anand Gajapathi Raju and Ors. v. P.V.G. Raju, (2000) 4 SCC 539, the Supreme Court held
that the language of Section 8 of the Arbitration Act is peremptory in nature and therefore, in cases
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187367970/
18
where there is an Arbitration Clause in the agreement, it is obligatory for the Court to refer the
parties to arbitration in terms of their arbitration agreement and nothing remains to be decided in
the original action after such an application is made, except to refer the dispute to an arbitrator.
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number
2023/DHC/000153
39. In Vidya Drolia (supra), the Supreme Court reiterated this principle in the following words:
"133. Prima facie case in the context of Section 8 is not to be confused with the merits
of the case put up by the parties which has to be established before the Arbitral
Tribunal. It is restricted to the subject-matter of the suit being prima facie arbitrable
under a valid arbitration agreement. Prima facie case means that the assertions on
these aspects are bona fide. When read with the principles of separation and
competence- competence and Section 34 of the Arbitration Act, the referral court
without getting bogged down would compel the parties to abide unless there are good
and substantial reasons to the contrary.
134. Prima facie examination is not full review but a primary first review to weed out
manifestly and ex facie non-existent and invalid arbitration agreements and
non-arbitrable disputes. The prima facie review at the reference stage is to cut the
deadwood and trim off the side branches in straightforward cases where dismissal is
barefaced and pellucid and when on the facts and law the litigation must stop at the
first stage. Only when the court is certain that no valid arbitration agreement exists
or the disputes/subject-matter are not arbitrable, the application under Section 8
would be rejected. At this stage, the court should not get lost in thickets and decide
debatable questions of facts. Referral proceedings are preliminary and summary and
not a mini trial. This necessarily reflects on the nature of the jurisdiction exercised by
the court and in this context, the observations of B.N. Srikrishna, J. of "plainly
arguable" case in Shin-Etsu Chemical Co. Ltd. [Shin-Etsu Chemical Co. Ltd. v. Aksh
Optifibre Ltd., are of importance and relevance. Similar views are expressed by this
Court in Vimal Kishor Shah [Vimal Kishor Shah v. Jayesh Dinesh Shah, wherein the
test applied at the pre-
arbitration stage was whether there is a "good Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA
NEGI 18:11:59 Neutral Citation Number 2023/DHC/000153 arguable case" for the existence of an
arbitration agreement."
40. In view of the above, I have, therefore, intentionally not dwelled into the details of the disputes
between the parties for any observations may be construed as observations on merit of the inter se
claims of the parties to the Suit. These would have to be necessarily left for the adjudication by the
learned Arbitrator.
RELIEF
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187367970/
19
41. In view of the above, the application filed by the defendant under Section 8 of the Arbitration Act
is allowed. The parties are referred to Arbitration in accordance with Clause 14 of the Partnership
Deed dated 08.09.2003.
CS(COMM) 715/2019 & I.A. 18161/2019, I.A. 475/2020, 476/2020, 2864/2020, 2879/2020 &
3607/2020
42. In view of the order passed above, the present Suit and the pending applications stand disposed
of.
NAVIN CHAWLA, J.
JANUARY 10, 2023/rv/DJ Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:RENUKA NEGI 18:11:59
M/S Liberty Footwear Company vs M/S Liberty International on 10 January, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187367970/
20
