Supreme Court of India
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Author: M.R. Shah
Bench: M.R. Shah, Manoj Misra
                                                                   REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
                                    WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 421 OF 2019
                         Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr.
                         President Mahesh Chand Sharma           …Appellant(s)
                                                        Versus
                         Union of India and Ors.                 …Respondent(s)
                                                         WITH
                                    WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 777 OF 2020
                         Manoj Kumar Nagar                       …Appellant(s)
                                                        Versus
                         Union of India                          …Respondent(s)
                                                         AND
                                    WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 712 OF 2020
                         Raj Kumar Verma                         …Appellant(s)
                                                        Versus
Signature Not Verified
                         Union of India                          …Respondent(s)
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2023.05.02
16:43:17 IST
Reason:
                         Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019
                         Page 1 of 74
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
1
�                         JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019
1. By way of this writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, filed by the writ
petitioner – Moser Baer Karamchari Union have prayed for an appropriate writ, direction or order
striking down Section 327(7) of the Companies Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as “Act, 2013”) as
arbitrary and violative of Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
It is also prayed to issue an appropriate writ, direction or order in the nature of Mandamus so as to
leave the statutory claims of the “workmen’s dues” out of the purview of waterfall mechanism under
Section 53 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (hereinafter referred to either as “IBC” or
“Code”).
It is further prayed to issue an appropriate writ in the nature of Mandamus by giving a purposive
interpretation to Section 53 of the IBC and pass necessary directions which will enable the
petitioners to get their dues of 24 months released without any further delay.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 Writ Petition (C) Nos. 777 and 712 of 2020 1.1 By way of these writ
petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, the respective writ petitioners have prayed
that Clause 19(a) of the Eleventh Schedule of the IBC pursuant Section 255 of the IBC, be declared
as unreasonable and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India as Clause 19(a) of the
Eleventh Schedule of the IBC inserts sub-section (7) in Section 327 of the Companies Act, 2013,
which puts statutory bar on the application of Sections 326 and 327 of the Companies Act, 2013, to
the liquidation proceedings under the IBC.
It is further prayed that sub-section (7) of Section 327 of the Companies Act, 2013, be declared as
unreasonable and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India as sub-section (7) of Section 327
of the Companies Act, 2013, which was inserted in Section 327 of the Companies Act, 2013 pursuant
to Section 255 and the Eleventh Schedule of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, Act 31 of
2016, creates unreasonable classification for the distribution of legitimate dues of workmen in the
event of liquidation of the Company under the IBC and liquidation of Company under the provisions
of the Companies Act, 2013.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 It is also prayed that distribution of the workmen's due as
envisaged under Section 53(1)(b)(i) of the IBC, be declared as unreasonable and violative of Article
14 of the Constitution of India, as Section 53(1)(b)(i) of the IBC limits the workmen's dues payable to
workmen to twenty- four months only preceding the date of order of Liquidation and then rank the
said workmen's dues equally with the secured creditors in the events such secured creditors has
relinquished security in the manner set out in Section 52 of the IBC.
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
2
It is further prayed that settlement of Workmen Dues should be done in accordance with the
reasonable principles laid down under Section 326 even in the event of liquidation under the IBC.
2. Shri K.V. Viswanathan, learned Senior Advocate has appeared as Amicus Curiae. Shri Gopal
Sankaranarayanan, learned Senior Advocate, has appeared on behalf of the petitioner(s). Shri Balbir
Singh, learned ASG has appeared on behalf of the respondent- Union of India.
3. Shri K.V. Viswanathan, learned Senior Advocate has first of all taken us to the legislative history
of the Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 Companies Act and the Preferential Payments and also the
framing of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code.
3.1 It is submitted that the Companies Act, 1956, as it existed prior to the Companies (Amendment)
Act, 1985, did not provide for any “overriding preferential payments” to any party. It is submitted
that in 1985, the Companies (Amendment) Bill, 1985 sought to introduce the proviso to sub-section
(1) of Section 529, definition of “workmen”, “workmen’s dues” and “workmen’s portion” through
insertion of Section 529(3) and the “overriding preferential payments” through Section 529-A.
3.2 It is submitted that the Statement of Objects and Reasons for bringing these changes into effect
was to ensure that the resources of the company are distributed even to workers whose labour and
effort form a part of the capital of the Company. Resultantly, through Companies (Amendment) Act,
1985, the idea of “workmen’s portion” and the “overriding preferential payments” were introduced
and crystallised in the Companies Act, 1956.
3.3 It is submitted that a cumulative reading of Section 529 and Section 529-A of the Companies
Act, 1956 indicates that firstly, the security of every secured creditor is deemed to be subject to a pari
passu charge in favour Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 of the appellant - workmen, to the extent of
the workmen’s portion. Secondly, when the secured creditor opts to realise his security, so much of
the debt due to such secured creditor as could not be realised by him by virtue of the proviso or the
amount of workmen’s portion in his security, whichever is less, will rank pari passu with the
workmen’s dues. Thirdly, the workmen’s dues and debts of secured creditor as described in Section
529(1) Proviso
(c) get overriding preferential payment and rank pari passu. These debts are payable in full, unless
the assets are insufficient to meet them, in which case they shall abate in equal proportions.
3.4 It is submitted that Section 530, when it provides for “Preferential Payments”, restricts
Government dues to a period of 12 months and wages or salary of an employee to a period not
exceeding 4 months within 12 months next before the relevant date, subject to limit in sub-section
(2) of Section 530(1)(b).
3.5 It is submitted that prior to enactment of the Companies Act, 2013, there were several
Committees that were set-up in order to consider the proposals for reformation of the Companies
Act, 1956. It is submitted that two of these Committees and their proposals are indicative of the
issues that were sought to be addressed Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 through a new,
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
3
refurbished legislation. In the year 2000, the Report of the High-Level Committee on Law relating
to Insolvency and Winding Up of Companies was submitted under the chairmanship of Justice V.
Balakrishna Eradi (popularly known as “Eradi Committee”). On consideration of various
suggestions received by it, the Eradi Committee inter alia recommended that appropriate legislative
action must be taken to ensure that the claims of all “employees of a company” and its secured
creditors are ranked pari passu. Thereafter, in 2005, the Report of Expert Committee on Company
Law, 2005 was submitted under the chairmanship of Dr. Jamshed J. Irani. The Irani Committee, on
consideration of proposals before it, recommended that the status of secured creditors should be
pari passu with “employees” in respect of their claims after payment of claims related to costs and
expenses of administration of liquidation.
3.6 It is submitted that the focus of these two Committees was on bringing the claims of “employees
of a company” pari passu with the secured creditors, when the existing provision as on that day only
specified that “workmen’s dues” would rank pari passu with secured creditors. It is submitted that
these two Reports were followed by the introduction of the Companies Bill, 2009 Writ Petition (C)
No. 421 of 2019 which retained the same structure as that of Section 529, 529-A and 530 of the
Companies Act, 1956. It is submitted that it was clear that the recommendations qua ranking of dues
of “employees of a company” were not accepted as the existing structure had been retained. It is
submitted that however, this Companies Bill, 2009 lapsed and, therefore, the same was not given
effect to.
3.7 It is submitted that thereafter, again, the Companies Bill, 2011 was introduced, which was then
referred to a Standing Committee. The Report of the Standing Committee of 15th Lok Sabha on
Companies Bill, 2011 notes the legislative changes made to the Companies Act, 1956 and the
Companies Bill, 2009. It is submitted that this indicates that Section 326, which was being
introduced in lieu of Section 529-A of Companies Act, 1956, will now include a proviso to Section
326(1) and amendment to Section 326(2) to ensure that wages/salaries payable to workmen for a
period of 2 years is protected in the case of winding up. The rationale given for this legislative
change was to protect interest of workmen in case of winding up. It is submitted that resultantly, the
Companies Act, 2013, as enacted, while mostly retaining the structure of Section 529 and 529-A of
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 the Companies Act, 1956, introduced the proviso to Section 326(1)
and also modified Section 326(2).
3.8 It is submitted that the consequence of this change was that while workmen’s dues and dues
owed to secured creditors as per Section 325(1) Proviso (c) ranked pari passu, the wages and salaries
due to workmen for a period of 2 years preceding winding up order, shall be paid in priority to all
other debts, within a period of 30 days of sale of assets and shall be subject to such charge over the
security of secured creditors as may be prescribed. Importantly, the Government Dues and wages or
salary owned to employees remained restricted to periods as they were in the Companies Act, 1956.
It is submitted that another important aspect to be noted is that the definition of “workmen’s dues”
includes the Pension Fund, Gratuity Fund and the Provident Fund amounts and there was no
exclusion of the said amounts in the case of liquidation. It is submitted that therefore, the position
of law regarding “overriding preferential payments” and “preferential payments”, as per the
Companies Act, 1956 and the Companies Act, 2013, is that workmen have a charge over the property
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
4
of the security of every secured creditor to the extent of workmen’s portion, the workmen’s dues
rank pari passu with the debts owed to secured creditors Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 and
specifically wages or salary due to workmen for a period of 2 years preceding the winding up order
shall be paid in priority to all other debts.
3.9 That thereafter, Shri K.V. Viswanathan, learned Senior Advocate and Amicus Curiae has taken
us to the framing of the IBC. It is submitted that the Bankruptcy Law Reforms Committee submitted
its Report on 04.11.2015. The said Report discussed the changes that are to be made to the existing
regime of insolvency and bankruptcy proceedings and inter alia provided for reasons as to why
changes were being made to the existing position of law. It is submitted that important parts of the
Bankruptcy Law Reforms Committee (BLRC) Report may be summarized as follows:
i. The Committee noted that operational creditors will include workmen and
employees whose past payments are due.
ii. Further, the Committee notes that the Central and State Government dues will be
kept at a priority below the unsecured financial creditors in addition to all kinds of
secured creditors.
iii. The Committee also categorically notes that liquidation under the new regime will have an
irreversible, time-bound Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 process with defined payout
prioritisation. In the waterfall, secured creditors shall share highest priority along with a defined
period of workmen dues.
iv. Thereafter, the Committee, in order to bring the law in India in line with global practice,
established the priority of payout in liquidation and drafting instructions were accordingly given. As
proposed, the costs of IRP and Liquidation would rank first. After that, secured creditors and
workmen dues capped up to 3 months from the start of IRP will be given pari passu priority. This
was to be followed by dues to employees capped up-to 3 months. As the next tier, workmen dues for
9 month period beginning 12 months before liquidation commencement date and ending 3 months
before liquidation commencement date were to rank along with dues to unsecured financial
creditors.
v. The Committee also notes that there was some debate on whether priority given to workmen in
Companies Act, 2013 should be retained in the new Code.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 3.10 It is submitted that thus, the BLRC Report recommended a
waterfall mechanism that was different from the Companies Act, 1956 and the Companies Act, 2013,
with due cognizance of the position of law as it existed then. It is submitted that having reviewed the
position of law and in view of the objects sought to be achieved through the IBC, the BLRC Report
recommended that workmen’s dues will be capped at 3 months and will have pari passu priority
with secured creditors and thereafter, the remaining dues will rank along with unsecured creditors.
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
5
3.11 It is submitted that the IBC was introduced as a Bill in 2015. It is submitted that Section 36, as
introduced in the Bill, provided for formation of the liquidation estate. Section 36(4)(a)(iii), as
introduced in the Bill, stated that the contributions in respect of employee pensions alone would be
excluded from the liquidation estate assets and would not be used for recovery in liquidation.
Section 53, as introduced in the Bill, provided for the waterfall mechanism for payout in case of
liquidation. Section 53(1)
(b)(i) and (ii) ranked debts owed to secured creditors in the event of them relinquishing security and
workmen’s dues for a period of 12 months preceding liquidation commencement date, pari passu. It
is submitted that in Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 terms of the waterfall mechanism, this was
therefore a step further than the path suggested by the BLRC Report since the workmen’s dues were
to rank pari passu for a defined period of 12 months. It is submitted that however, thereafter, the
IBC, when introduced as a Bill, was then referred to a Joint Committee. The Joint Committee on
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2015 of the 16 th Lok Sabha submitted its report in April, 2016. It
is submitted that the Joint Committee Report made two important recommendations in regard to
the provisions contained in the Bill. Firstly, after noting representations from the workmen and
employees, it was recommended that the Provident Fund, Pension Fund and Gratuity Fund are to be
excluded from the liquidation estate assets under Section 36, since they provide the social safety net
to the workmen and employees. Secondly, after consideration of the representations that workmen
dues are to be paid as per the scheme contained in the Companies Act, 2013, the Joint Committee
recommended that since the dues owed to Governments are being paid in respect of two years
preceding liquidation commencement date, the workmen’s dues must also be paid for a period of
two years, instead of the existing period of 12 months, preceding liquidation commencement date. It
is submitted Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 that this was recommended keeping in mind that the
workers are the “nerve centre of any company” and that their interests were to be protected. It is
submitted that keeping in view the Joint Committee Recommendations, the IBC was brought into
force. It is submitted that Section 36(4)(a)(iii) of the IBC now excludes all sums due to any workman
or employee from the Provident Fund, Pension Fund and Gratuity Fund from being included in the
liquidation estate assets. It is further submitted that Section 53(1)(b)(i) and (ii) of the IBC now ranks
workmen’s dues for a period of 2 years preceding the liquidation commencement date and the debts
owed to secured creditors in event of them relinquishing their security pari passu. It is submitted
that dues owed to the employees are placed in Section 53(1)(c), confined to a period of 12 months,
and the dues to Central Government and State Government are placed in Section 53(1)(e)(i),
confined to a period of 2 years and below that of the unsecured creditors. It is submitted that the
result, therefore, is that the position and waterfall mechanism as provided for in the Companies Act,
1956 and the Companies Act, 2013 has now been altered after application of mind and resultantly,
the workmen’s dues have been capped at 24 months preceding the liquidation Writ Petition (C) No.
421 of 2019 commencement date. The changes introduced from the erstwhile regime have been so
done on the basis of an organic evolution of law and consultative process, after due consideration of
the requirements of a new Code governing liquidation.
3.12 It is submitted that Section 53 Explanation (ii) of IBC states that the term “workmen’s dues”
shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in Section 326 of the Companies Act, 2013. It is
submitted that thereafter, the Eleventh Schedule to the IBC proposes Amendments to be made to
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
6
Companies Act, 2013. It is submitted that importantly, Clause 18 of the Schedule omits erstwhile
Section 325 of the Companies Act, 2013. It is submitted that Clause 19 of the Schedule amends
Section 326 of Companies Act, 2013. Thereafter, Clause 20 of the Schedule inserts Section 327(7) to
the Companies Act, 2013 which states that Section 326 and Section 327 shall not be applicable in the
event of liquidation under the IBC. A conjoint reading of Section 53 Explanation (ii) of IBC and
Section 327(7) of Companies Act, 2013 would indicate that only the meaning of “workmen’s dues” is
incorporated by reference into the IBC. However, the waterfall mechanism, as has been fully altered
by the IBC will apply to these “workmen’s dues” and not the waterfall Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of
2019 mechanism contained in Section 326 of Companies Act, 2013. It is submitted that the reason
for introduction of Section 327(7) of Companies Act, 2013 is only to exclude the application of
waterfall mechanism and the modalities contained in the Companies Act, 2013 which has now been
changed through the IBC. It is submitted that therefore, the argument that the waterfall mechanism
from the Companies Act, 2013 must apply even under the IBC, would be wholly untenable and
unworkable.
3.13 It is submitted that subsequently, the Insolvency Law Committee submitted its report in 2018
under the chairmanship of Mr. Injeti Srinivas. The Report contained summary responses of the
Committee to the comments and issues raised with respect to the IBC. It is submitted that
importantly, all questions that raised the issue of workmen’s dues either being unfairly ranked with
secured creditors or that workmen’s dues were not protected under the IBC, the Committee noted
that the interests of workmen were protected in line with the Objects sought to be achieved by the
IBC.
3.14 It is further submitted that therefore, the legislature through the IBC has attempted to overhaul
the existing system of law and provide for a different modality through which liquidation would
function. It is submitted that under Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 the Companies Act, 2013, the
waterfall mechanism and preferential payments were being made, keeping in mind the scheme of
winding up of a Company. It is submitted that admittedly, workmen’s dues were given pari passu
priority with secured creditors of a defined kind and the wages and salaries owed for two years
preceding the Order of winding up was to get absolute priority. It is further submitted that on the
contrary, the scheme of the IBC is different from that of the Companies Act, 2013. It is submitted
that the focus, in the IBC, is to revive the Company and it is only as a matter of last resort that
liquidation envisaged. In liquidation, from the time of the BLRC Report, the focus has been on
defined payout prioritisation and organically, the workmen’s dues have increased from 3 months to
12 months and now to 24 months to rank pari passu with secured creditors who relinquish their
security. It is submitted that this evolution of the IBC has been as a result of a consultative process,
the position of workmen’s dues has been reviewed at multiple occasions and the legislature, in its
wisdom, has opted to cap it to a period of 24 months prior to liquidation commencement date. It is
further submitted that the Pension Fund, Gratuity Fund and Provident Fund are left out of the
liquidation estate, in a bid to protect the social Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 safety net of the
workmen. Therefore, the changes made through the IBC, to the existing scheme under the
Companies Act, 2013 would not be unconstitutional.
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
7
3.15 Shri K.V. Viswanathan, learned Senior Advocate and Amicus Curiae has further submitted that
this Hon’ble Court in a catena of judgments has considered the principle of “judicial hands-off”
when it comes to economic legislations. It is submitted that in economic matters, a wider latitude is
given to the law-maker and the Court allows for experimentation in such legislations based on
practical experiences and other problems seen by the law-makers. It is submitted that in a challenge
to such a legislation, the Court does not adopt a doctrinaire approach. Reliance is placed on the
decisions of Manish Kumar Vs. Union of India and Anr., (2021) 5 SCC 1 (Paras 169, 249-251); Swiss
Ribbons Private Limited and Anr. Vs. Union of India and Ors., (2019) 4 SCC 17 [(Paras 17-24,
25-28) [for objects of IBC] r/w Para 120]; Small Scale Industrial Manufacturers Association
(Registered) Vs. Union of India and Ors., (2021) 8 SCC 511 (Paras 60-72). It is further submitted
that as observed in a catena of decisions, a vested right under a statute can be taken away by another
statute, in view of Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 public interest and in view of it being an
economic measure.
3.16 On IBC and reasonable classification, Shri K.V. Viswanathan, learned Senior Advocate and
Amicus Curiae has submitted that in the case of Swiss Ribbons Private Limited and Anr. (supra),
this Court was concerned with a challenge to Constitutional Validity of several provisions of the IBC
including the waterfall mechanism under Section 53 of the IBC, even though it was at the instance of
the Operational Creditors. It is submitted that after noting the objects and reasons for enactment of
the IBC, this Hon’ble Court held that there existed an intelligible differentia for classification of
financial creditors and operational creditors under the IBC. It is further submitted that Section 53 of
the IBC was also upheld from the perspective of this reasonable classification by placing reliance on
the object sought to be achieved by the IBC 3.17 It is further submitted that in the case of Committee
of Creditors of Essar Steel India Limited Vs. Satish Kumar Gupta and Ors., (2020) 8 SCC 531, this
Court was concerned with whether a resolution plan was to treat operational creditors on par with
financial creditors and further with amendments made to the IBC that provided Writ Petition (C)
No. 421 of 2019 operational creditors with a minimum of liquidation value under the CIRP Process.
It is submitted that this Court in the said decision held that the principle of “equality for all” cannot
be stretched to treat financial and operational creditors on par as this would defeat the entire
objective of the IBC. This Court also held that amendments made to the IBC that guaranteed a
minimum of liquidation value to operational creditors was not ultra vires Article 14.
3.18 He has also further submitted that in the case of Ghanashyam Mishra and Sons Private Limited
Vs. Edelweiss Asset Reconstruction Company Limited, (2021) 9 SCC 657, this Court was concerned
with whether the approved resolution plan was binding on the Government, whether before or after
the Amendment made to Section 31 of IBC by Amendment Act, 2019. It is submitted that this Court
categorically held that the amendment was clarificatory in nature and that the approved resolution
plan would be binding on the Government. While holding so, this Court noted the legislative intent
in making the plan binding on all stake holders, to create a clean slate and to ensure that no surprise
claims come up after the resolution process has begun.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 3.19 On interpretation of “workmen’s portion” under Section 529
and 529-A of the Companies Act, reliance is placed on the decision of this Court in the case of
Allahabad Bank Vs. Canara Bank and Anr., (2000) 4 SCC 406 as well as Andhra Bank Vs. Official
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
8
Liquidator and Anr., (2005) 5 SCC 75.
3.20 Making above submissions, it is prayed to allow the present writ petitions and grant the reliefs
as prayed.
4. We have heard Shri Balbir Singh, learned ASG appearing on behalf of the respondent – Union of
India.
4.1 Shri Balbir Singh, learned ASG has taken us to the relevant provisions under the Companies Act,
1956, more particularly, Sections 59A, 529A, 530 and the relevant provisions of the Companies Act,
2013.
4.2 It is submitted that initially the insolvency process in case of winding up of insolvent companies
were provided under Section 325 of Act, 2013. However, Section 325 of the Act, 2013 has been
omitted w.e.f. 15.11.2016 on advent of the IBC. It is submitted that therefore, as on today, the
winding up proceeding in case of insolvency are not governed by Companies Act, 2013 and the
provisions of the IBC is the only applicable law to deal Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 with such a
situation as it is a complete Code in itself. It is submitted that furthermore, an amendment w.e.f.
15.11.2016 was brought in under Section 327(7) of the Act, 2013 wherein it has been clarified that
the provisions of Section 326 and Section 327 of the Act, 2013 will not be applicable in the event of
liquidation under the IBC.
4.3 It is submitted that only in case of any winding up under Companies Act, 2013, Sections 326 and
327 of the Companies Act, 2013 are relevant. He has submitted that following are the relevant
features in case of winding up proceedings under Sections 326 and 327 of the Act, 2013:-
… workmen’s portion in the security shall be paid in priority to all other debts;
… however, workmen’s dues (given in (b)(i) and (ii) payable for the period of 24 months, shall be
paid in priority to all other debts (including debts due to secured creditors). This means that
wages/salary for the period of 24 months is over and above every other claim/debts (including debts
due to secured creditors).
… workmen’s dues include Provident Fund, Pension Fund and Gratuity Fund or any other Fund for
the Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 welfare of the workmen maintained by the Company.
4.4 It is submitted that the waterfall mechanism is given in Section 327, which is similar to Section
530 of the Companies Act, 1956. It is submitted that thereafter the IBC has been introduced in the
year 2016 wherein the workmen dues were duly protected and the Provident Fund, Gratuity Fund
and Pension Fund are excluded from the liquidation estate. It is submitted that as per Section 53 of
the IBC, the workmen dues are given the top priority in the waterfall mechanism.
4.5 It is submitted that the liquidation process is covered under Chapter III of the IBC, which
comprises from Sections 33 to 54. Section 36 of the IBC provides for liquidation estate and Section
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
9
36(4) of the IBC specifies certain payouts not to be included in the liquidation estate assets.
Therefore, as per the said provision, all these debts due are not to be included in the liquidation
estate assets. It is submitted that as per the said provision, all payments due to any workmen or
employee from Provident Fund, Pension Fund and The Gratuity Fund shall not be included in the
list of assets under liquidation estate.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 4.6 It is submitted that with respect to Section 53 of the IBC, sale
of liquidation assets shall be distributed in certain order of priority. It is submitted that as per
Section 53, the payment of insolvency resolution process costs and liquidation costs is paramount
and the same shall be paid in full. The liquidation cost includes the salary and wages paid to
workmen during the period of liquidation process to maintain the Company as going concern.
Thereafter, the payment of workmen dues for a period of 24 months are to be paid alongwith
secured creditors dues in the event of relinquishment of security. The workmen dues and debts of
secured creditors in the case of relinquishment of security are ranked equally between them.
However, in the case of enforcement of security any unpaid outstanding debt comes below in ladder
to Section 53(1)(e)(iii) of the IBC.
4.7 It is submitted that the challenge has been made on the ground of Article 14 of the Constitution
of India by comparing Section 53 of the IBC with the provisions of erstwhile Companies Act, 1956
and existing Companies Act, 2013 to state that workmen are at a disadvantageous position on the
basis: (i) workmen’s portion in the security Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 held by secured
creditor has been done away with; (ii) preference/superiority given to 24 months over any other
debt has been done away with; (iii) workmen and secured creditors have been placed in same pool.
4.8 To the aforesaid, it is submitted by Shri Balbir Singh, learned ASG that as such the IBC is a new
insolvency mechanism in line with the international practices and with overarching objective of
unlocking sick and insolvent companies primarily to revive such companies in event of failure, for
transparent and equitable liquidation of assets. It is submitted that the IBC was introduced as a
water- shed moment for insolvency law in India that consolidated process under several disparate
statutes such as Act, 2013, SICA, SARFAESI, Recovery of Debts Act etc., into a single Code. It is
submitted that the objective of the IBC was to introduce comprehensive and time bound insolvency
framework and to maximize the value of assets of all persons and balance the interest of all
stakeholders.
4.9 It is submitted that the UNICITRAL Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law was instructive for the
Indian experience on drafting the IBC which provided critical guidance on what an insolvency law
represents. It is Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 submitted that a reading together of the
UNICITRAL Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law and Bankruptcy Law Report clarifies in no
uncertain terms, that the procedure designed for the insolvency process under the IBC is critical for
allocating economic coordination between the parties who partake in or are bound by the process. It
is submitted that this Hon’ble Court has looked at overarching object and economic balance
achieved by IBC and as such has appreciated the working and operation of IBC in unlocking value
for all its stakeholders including financial institutions in the case of Innoventive Industries Limited
Vs. ICICI Bank and Anr., (2018) 1 SCC 407, followed in Arcelormittal India Private Limited Vs.
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
10
Satish Kumar Gupta and Ors., (2019) 2 SCC 1; Arun Kumar Jagatramka Vs. Jindal Steel and Power
Limited and Anr., (2021) 7 SCC 474 and Sesh Nath Singh and Anr. Vs. Baidyabati Sheoraphuli Co-
operative Bank Limited and Anr., (2021) 7 SCC 313.
4.10 It is submitted that as per the objectives of the IBC, it is clear that corporate death of a
Corporate Debtor is inevitable. However, every effort should be made to resuscitate the Corporate
debtor in the larger public interest, which includes not only the workmen of the corporate debtor,
but also its creditors and the goods it Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 produces in the larger
interest of the economy of the country.
4.11 It is submitted that in the Bankruptcy Law Reforms Committee (Volume 1) (November, 2015), it
was agreed that the assets held in by the entity in trust (such as employee pensions), assets held as
collateral to certain financial market institutions and assets held as part of operational transactions
where the entity has right over the asset but is not the owner of the same shall be excluded from the
liquidation estate. It is further submitted that it was also debated with respect to the waterfall
mechanism under the IBC and was agreed that the workmen dues capped up to 3 months will be
given the second priority with the secured creditor after the costs of the corporate insolvency and
resolution process and liquidation.
4.12 It is submitted that subsequently, a report of the Joint Committee on the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2015 was prepared and presented in Lok Sabha on 28.04.2016 wherein the issue
of exclusion of Provident Fund, Pension Fund and Gratuity Fund from the liquidation estate assets
and estate of bankrupt was Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 debated. It is submitted that the
Committee, after an in- depth examination, was of the view that Provident Fund, Pension Fund and
Gratuity Fund provide the social safety net to the workmen and employees and hence, need to be
secured in the event of liquidation of a company or bankruptcy of partnership firm. It is submitted
that the Committee further observed that the workers are the nerve center of any company and in
the event of any company becoming insolvent or bankrupt, the workmen get affected adversely and
therefore, priority must be given to their outstanding dues. Therefore, all sums due to any workman
or employee from the Provident Fund, Gratuity Fund or Pension Fund should not be included in the
liquidation estate assets. It is submitted that thus, to protect the interest of the workmen, the
Committee decided that the workmen dues for a period of 12 months as provided under Section 53
of the IBC be increased to 24 months preceding liquidation commencement date.
4.13 It is submitted that in light of the same, Section 36 of the IBC has clearly given outright
protection to workmen’s dues under Provident Fund, Pension Fund and Gratuity Fund which is not
treated as liquidation assets and liquidator has no claim over such funds. That therefore, Writ
Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 this share of workmen’s dues has consciously been taken outside the
liquidation process.
4.14 It is submitted that liquidation costs cover the wages and salary of the workmen during the
liquidation process. It is submitted that the liquidation cost is defined in Section 5(16) of the IBC
which includes the cost incurred by the liquidator during the period of liquidation subject to such
regulations as specified by the Board. It is submitted that with respect to the liquidation process, the
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
11
Board has notified the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (Liquidation Process) Regulations,
2016. It is submitted that Regulation 2(ea) talks about liquidation cost which under Section 5(16) of
the IBC includes the costs incurred by the liquidator in carrying on the business of the Corporate
Debtor as a going concern. That, therefore, the salary and wages of the workmen in case of going
concern liquidation are protected under the liquidation costs. It is further submitted that under the
Liquidation Regulations 2016, a mechanism is created wherein Regulation 19 provides for claim by
workmen and employee and Regulation 31A has been inserted to bring in stakeholders Consultation
Committee, where participation to workmen/ employees is given.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 4.15 It is submitted that the issue with respect to the workmen and
secured creditor being kept at equal footing under Section 53 of the IBC is only in the case wherein
the secured creditor has relinquished its security and the same is the part of the liquidation pool. It
is submitted that Section 52 of the IBC specifically states about the secured creditor in the
liquidation proceedings and Regulation 21A talks about the presumption of security interest in the
case of secured creditors. It is submitted that the said position has been duly considered by the
respondent – Union of India in the Report of the Insolvency Law Committee (March, 2018) as well
as Report of Insolvency Law Committee (February, 2020).
4.16 It is further submitted that the Committee in the Report of February, 2020 duly agreed that the
priority for recovery to secured creditors under Section 53(1)(b)(ii) should be applicable only to the
extent of the value of the security interest that is relinquished by the secured creditor. It is submitted
that the Committee noted that the Code aims to promote a collective liquidation process and
towards this end, it encourages secured creditors to relinquish their security interest by providing
them second Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 highest priority in the recovery of their dues under
Section 53(1)(b) of the IBC and are not treated as ordinary unsecured creditors under the IBC as
they would have been under the Companies Act, 1956. That the said provision intends to promote
the overall value maximization.
4.17 It is submitted that furthermore, the Committee in its report of February, 2020 also decided
whether the secured creditors who realized their security interest should contribute towards the
payment of dues of workmen. Regulation 21(A) of Liquidation Process requires that secured
creditors who realise their security interest contribute towards the payment of dues of workmen as
they would have if they had relinquished their security interest to the liquidation estate. It is
submitted that thus, the requirement to contribute to workmen dues as provided under Regulation
21A, recognizes that workmen are key stakeholders and form the backbone of the efforts to preserve
the business of the Corporate Debtor not just prior to commencement of insolvency but also during
the insolvency proceedings.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 4.18 It is submitted that thus, visualizing the objects and working
of the IBC, it is clear that the rights and interest of the workers have been protected from the date of
enactment of the IBC. It is submitted that in either case that is of relinquishment or
non-relinquishment of the security by the secured creditor, the interest of the workmen is protected.
It is submitted that in fact, the secured creditors are taking significant hair-cut and workmen are
being compensated on equitable basis in a just and proper manner as per Section 53 of the IBC. It is
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
12
submitted that therefore, it is unfair to say that ranking them with workmen is arbitrary, lest
manifestly arbitrary to declare Section 53 as unconstitutional.
4.19 It is submitted that from examination of waterfall mechanism as provided under Section 53 of
the IBC, it is clear that other stakeholders including the Central Government have seriously
compromises their position in connection with the recovery of statutory dues so as to enable value
maximization and reviving unhealthy companies on going concern basis. It is submitted that
therefore, to say that workmen are in any way adversely affected to the tune of arbitrariness or
inequity contemplated under Article 14 is erroneous.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 4.20 It is further submitted by Shri Balbir Singh, learned ASG
appearing on behalf of the respondent – Union of India that the IBC being a law relating to
economic activities as observed and held by this Court in the case of R.K. Garg Vs. Union of India
and Ors., (1981) 4 SCC 675, the laws relating to economy should be viewed with greater latitude than
the laws touching civil rights.
4.21 Making above submissions and relying upon the decisions of this Court in the case of R.K. Garg
(supra) (paras 8 and 16); Rustom Cavasjee Cooper Vs. Union of India, (1970) 1 SCC 248 (paras 63
and 179); Delhi Science Forum and Ors. Vs. Union of India and Anr., (1996) 2 SCC 405 (para7);
BALCO Employees’ Union (Regd.) Vs. Union of India and Ors., (2002) 2 SCC 333 (paras 46, 47, 92,
93, 94 and 98), it is prayed to observe and hold that Section 53 of the IBC, 2016 is neither arbitrary
nor violative of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India.
5. We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respective parties at length.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019
6. By way of this writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner - union
has sought for an appropriate writ, direction or order striking down Section 327(7) of the
Companies Act, 2013 as arbitrary and violative of Article 21 of the Constitution of India. The
petitioner has also sought for an appropriate direction so as to leave the statutory claims of the
“workmen’s dues” out of the purview of waterfall mechanism under Section 53 of the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016. As per Section 327(7), Sections 326 and 327 of the Act, 2013 shall not be
applicable in the event of liquidation under the IBC. Sections 326 and 327 of the Act, 2013 provide
for preferential payments in a winding up under the provisions of the Act, 2013. However, in view of
the introduction of new regime under the IBC, in case of liquidation under IBC, distribution is to be
made as per Section 53 of IBC. At this stage, it is required to be noted that IBC has been enacted
w.e.f. 28.05.2016 and as per Section 53 of the IBC, the distribution of assets in case of liquidation
under the IBC is required to be made. Section 53 of the IBC reads as under: -
“53. Distribution of assets.—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained
in any law enacted by the Parliament or any State Legislature for the time being in
force, the proceeds from the sale of the liquidation assets shall be distributed in the
following Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 order of priority and within such period
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
13
and in such manner as may be specified, namely—
(a) the insolvency resolution process costs and the liquidation costs paid in full;
(b) the following debts which shall rank equally between and among the following—
(i) workmen's dues for the period of twenty-four months preceding the liquidation
commencement date; and
(ii) debts owed to a secured creditor in the event such secured creditor has
relinquished security in the manner set out in Section 52;
(c) wages and any unpaid dues owed to employees other than workmen for the period
of twelve months preceding the liquidation commencement date;
(d) financial debts owed to unsecured creditors;
(e) the following dues shall rank equally between and among the following:—
(i) any amount due to the Central Government and the State Government including
the amount to be received on account of the Consolidated Fund of India and the
Consolidated Fund of a State, if any, in respect of the whole or any part of the period
of two years preceding the liquidation commencement date;
(ii) debts owed to a secured creditor for any amount unpaid following the
enforcement of security interest;
(f) any remaining debts and dues;
(g) preference shareholders, if any; and
(h) equity shareholders or partners, as the case may be.
(2) Any contractual arrangements between recipients under sub-section (1) with
equal ranking, if disrupting the order of priority under that sub-section shall be
disregarded by the liquidator.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 (3) The fees payable to the liquidator shall be deducted
proportionately from the proceeds payable to each class of recipients under sub-section (1), and the
proceeds to the relevant recipient shall be distributed after such deduction.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section—
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
14
(i) it is hereby clarified that at each stage of the distribution of proceeds in respect of a class of
recipients that rank equally, each of the debts will either be paid in full, or will be paid in equal
proportion within the same class of recipients, if the proceeds are insufficient to meet the debts in
full; and
(ii) the term “workmen's dues” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in Section 326 of the
Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013).” In view of the enactment of IBC and Section 53 of the IBC, it
necessitated to amend the Act, 2013. As per Sub-Section (7) of Section 327, Sections 326 and 327
shall not be applicable in the event of liquidation under the IBC. The object and purpose of
amending the Act, 2013 and to exclude Sections 326 and 327 in the event of liquidation under the
IBC seems to be that there may not be two different provisions with respect to winding
up/liquidation of a company. Therefore, in view of the enactment of IBC, it necessitated to exclude
the applicability of Sections 326 and 327 of the Act, 2013 which cannot be said to be arbitrary as
contended on behalf of the petitioner.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 6.1 At this stage, it is required to be noted that Sub- Section (7) of
Section 327 of which the vires are under challenge, shall be applicable in case of liquidation of a
company under the IBC. Meaning thereby, in case of liquidation of a company under IBC, the
provisions of Section 53 of the IBC and other provisions of the IBC shall be applicable as the
company is ordered to be liquidated or wound up under the provisions of IBC. Therefore, merely
because under the earlier regime and in case of winding up of a company under the Act, 1956/2013,
the dues of the workmen may have pari passu with that of the secured creditor, the petitioner cannot
claim the same benefit in case of winding up/liquidation of the company under IBC. The parties
shall be governed by the provisions of the IBC in case of liquidation of a company under the
provisions of the IBC.
6.2 Now so far as Section 53 of the IBC is concerned, it provides for distribution of the assets in case
of liquidation of a company under IBC. As per Section 53(1)(b) the workmen’s dues for the period of
twenty-four months preceding the liquidation commencement date shall rank equally between the
workmen and the secured creditor in the event such secured creditor has relinquished security in
the manner set out in Section 52. Therefore, workmen’s Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 dues for
the period of twenty-four months preceding the liquidation commencement date shall have pari
passu with the dues of secured creditor. At this stage, it is required to be noted that as per Section
36(4) of IBC, all sums due to any workman or employee from the provident fund, the pension fund
and the gratuity fund shall not be included in the liquidation estate assets and shall not be used for
the recovery in the liquidation. Therefore, a conscious decision has been taken by the
Parliament/Legislature in its wisdom to keep out of all sums due to any workman/employee from
the provident fund, the pension fund and the gratuity fund from the liquidation estate assets [as per
Section 36(4)] and that the workmen’s dues for the period of twenty-four months preceding the
liquidation commencement date shall rank equally between the workmen’s dues to the said extent
and the dues to the secured creditor. Therefore, the same cannot be said to be arbitrary and violative
of Article 21 of the Constitution of India as contended on behalf of the petitioner. As per the settled
position of law, IBC is a complete Code and the object and purpose of IBC is altogether different
than that of the Act, 1956/2013. The IBC is a new insolvency mechanism, therefore, the provisions
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
15
under the IBC cannot be compared with that of Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 the earlier regime,
namely, the Companies Act, 1956/2013.
6.3 At this stage, it is required to be noted that the issue with respect to the workman and the
secured creditor being kept at equal footing under Section 53 of the IBC is only in a case wherein the
secured creditor has relinquished its security and the same is the part of the stage of the liquidation
pool.
7. Section 2711 of the Companies Act 2013, as originally enacted, had as many as seven grounds on
which a company could be wound up. Ground (a) on 1 271. Circumstances in which company may be
wound up by Tribunal. – (1) A company may, on a petition under section 272, be wound-up by the
Tribunal, -
(a) If the company is unable to pay debts;
(b) if the company has, by special resolution, resolved that the company be wound up by the
Tribunal;
(c) if the company has acted against the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the
security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality;
(d) if the Tribunal has ordered the winding up of the company under Chapter XIX;
(e) if on an application made by the Registrar or any other person authorised by the Central
Government by notification under this Act, the Tribunal is of the opinion that the affairs of the
company have been conducted in a fraudulent manner or the company was formed for fraudulent
and unlawful purpose or the persons concerned in the formation or management of its affairs have
been guilty of fraud, misfeasance or misconduct in connection therewith and that is proper that the
company be wound up;
(f) if the company has made a default in filing with the Registrar its financial statements or annual
returns for immediately preceding five consecutive financial years; or
(g) if the Tribunal is of the opinion that it is just and equitable that the company should be wound
up.
*** Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 which the company could be wound up was when the company
is unable to pay its debts. The other grounds were, when the company, by special resolution, has
decided to be wound up; when the company has acted against the interests of sovereignty and
integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign State, public order,
decency or morality; if the Tribunal has ordered winding up of the company under Chapter XIX of
the Companies Act, 2013, a chapter relating to revival and rehabilitation of sick companies; if on an
application made by the Registrar or any other person authorised by the Central Government by
notification, the Tribunal is of the opinion that the affairs of the company have been conducted in a
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
16
fraudulent manner or the company has been formed for fraudulent and unlawful purpose, or
persons concerned in formation or management of its affairs have been guilty of fraud, misfeasance,
misconduct in connection therewith, which makes it proper that the company be wound up; or if the
company has made default in filing its financial statements or annual returns with the Registrar for
immediately preceding five consecutive financial years; lastly, if the Tribunal is of the opinion that it
is just and equitable to wind up the company.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 7.1 The provision as enacted was never enforced till it was
substituted by Act No. 31 of 2016 and the Eleventh Schedule in paragraph 10 of the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 20162, with effect from 15th November 2016. This coincided with the enactment
and enforcement of the Code, also applicable with effect from 15 th November 2016. Consequent to
the substitution, Section 2713 of the Companies Act 2013 now envisages only five grounds for
winding up of the company under the Companies Act 2013. The first ground is where the company,
by special resolution, has resolved to be wound up by the Tribunal. The other grounds are when the
company has acted against the sovereignty and integrity 2 For short, “Code”.
3 271. Circumstances in which company may be wound up by Tribunal. – A company may, on a
petition under section 272, be wound-up by the Tribunal, -
(a) if the company has, by special resolution, resolved that the company be wound up by the
Tribunal;
(b) if the company has acted against the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the
security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality;
(c) if on an application made by the Registrar or any other person authorised by the Central
Government by notification under this Act, the Tribunal is of the opinion that the affairs of the
company have been conducted in a fraudulent manner or the company was formed for fraudulent
and unlawful purpose or the persons concerned in the formation or management of its affairs have
been guilty of fraud, misfeasance or misconduct in connection therewith and that is proper that the
company be wound up;
(d) if the company has made a default in filing with the Registrar its financial statements or annual
returns for immediately preceding five consecutive financial years; or
(e) if the Tribunal is of the opinion that it is just and equitable that the company should be wound
up.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 of India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign
States, public order, decency or morality; if the Tribunal on an application made by the Registrar or
any other person authorised by the Central Government by a notification is satisfied that the affairs
of the company have been conducted in a fraudulent manner, or the company was formed for a
fraudulent or unlawful purpose, or the persons concerned in the formation or management of its
affairs have been found to be guilty of fraud, misfeasance or misconduct in connection therewith,
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
17
which makes it proper for the company to be wound up; if the company has defaulted in filing
financial statements and annual returns with the Registrar for immediately preceding five
consecutive financial years; and lastly if the Tribunal is of the opinion that it is just and equitable
that the company should be wound up.
7.2 Clearly, the legislature has now removed clause (a) to Section 271 of the Companies Act, 2013,
when a company is unable to pay the debts, and clause (d) to Section 271 of the Companies Act,
2013, when a company is directed to be wound up under the Chapter XIX of the Companies Act,
2013. In fact, Chapter XIX of the Companies Act 2013 was deleted/omitted in terms of Act No. 31 of
2016 and the Eleventh Schedule in Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 paragraph 8 of the Code, with
effect from 15 th November 2016. The Code, as enacted, is a separate and consolidated enactment
specifically relating to and dealing with companies which are insolvent and unable to pay dues, and
envisages a procedure with a mandate to first explore possibility of rehabilitation and revival of the
company, and the dissolution/winding up as the last call. 7.3 This is significant and must be
highlighted when we examine the question of the Constitutional challenge made by the petitioners,
so as to not frustrate the objective and purpose of the Code, which completely replaces the then
existing framework for insolvency and bankruptcy resolution that was inadequate, ineffective and
guilty of causing undue delays. The enactment of the Code and the amendments thereafter are a
consequence of detailed consultation and deliberations by several committees, commissions and
experts4, in a matter which deals with the economy of the country as a whole. Earlier position was
far from satisfactory in spite of enactment of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act,
4 See – The Report of High Level Committee on Law Relating to Insolvency and Winding Up of
Companies, 2000, The Report of the Expert Committee on Company Law dated 31.05.2005, 57th
Report of the Standing Committee of 15th Lok Sabha on Finance on The Companies Bill, 2011, The
Report of the Bankruptcy Law Reforms Committee dated 04.11.2015, The Report of Joint
Committee on Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2015 of the 16 th Lok Sabha and The report of the
Insolvency Law Committee dated 26.03.2018.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 1985, the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial
Institutions Act, 1993, and the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002. The Code has been enacted with the objective of
reorganisation and insolvency resolution of corporate persons, partnership firms and individuals in
a time-bound manner for maximisation of the value of assets, promote entrepreneurship, enhance
availability of credit and balance the interests of all stakeholders, including by alteration in the
priority of payment of government dues, to establish an Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund, and
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The objective is to improve the ease of doing
business and facilitate more investments, leading to higher economic growth and development.
8. We have earlier referred to, in detail, the divergent opinions expressed while enacting the Code on
the status of the workmen's dues and the hierarchy in which they should be placed. The waterfall
mechanism now prescribed in the Code with reference to the workmen’s dues is a well-considered
and thought-out decision. The waterfall mechanism and the hierarchy prescribed to the workmen’s
dues should be seen in the overall objective of the Code, which is to explore whether the corporate
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 debtor can be revived so that jobs are not lost, the use of economic
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
18
assets is maximised, and there is an effective legal framework which enhances the viability of credit
in the hands of banks and financial institutions. The Code recognises the financial impact on
secured creditors or financial institutions dealing with public money, as their economic health is
equally important for the general public as well as the national economy. Unless there is economic
growth and fresh investments in the industry, employment opportunities will not be available,
which would in turn lead to economic woes, insolvencies and bankruptcies. These are all complex
economic matters wherein various conflicting interests have to be balanced, and a holistic rather
than a one-sided, approach is to be taken. Each opinion may have merit, but the court can hardly
substitute its own wisdom or view for that of the legislature, especially when the enactment is the
outcome of a thought-out and ruminated review on complex fiscal and commercial challenges facing
the economy. It is in this context, this Court, while upholding the Constitutional validity of the Code
on the challenge of discrimination made by the operational creditors in Swiss Ribbons Private
Limited and Another. v. Union of India and Others.5 had observed as under:
5 (2019) 4 SCC 17.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 “Judicial hands-off qua economic legislation ****
21. In this country, this Court in R.K. Garg v. Union of India, (1981) 4 SCC 675, has held :
“8. Another rule of equal importance is that laws relating to economic activities should be viewed
with greater latitude than laws touching civil rights such as freedom of speech, religion, etc. It has
been said by no less a person than Holmes, J., that the legislature should be allowed some play in
the joints, because it has to deal with complex problems which do not admit of solution through any
doctrinaire or straitjacket formula and this is particularly true in case of legislation dealing with
economic matters, where, having regard to the nature of the problems required to be dealt with,
greater play in the joints has to be allowed to the legislature. The court should feel more inclined to
give judicial deference to legislative judgment in the field of economic regulation than in other areas
where fundamental human rights are involved. Nowhere has this admonition been more felicitously
expressed than in Morey v. Doud where Frankfurter, J., said in his inimitable style:
‘In the utilities, tax and economic regulation cases, there are good reasons for judicial
self-restraint if not judicial deference to legislative judgment. The legislature after all
has the affirmative responsibility. The courts have only the power to destroy, not to
reconstruct. When these are added to the complexity of economic regulation, the
uncertainty, the liability to error, the bewildering conflict of the experts, and the
number of times the Judges have been overruled by events — self-
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 limitation can be seen to be the path to judicial wisdom and
institutional prestige and stability.’ The Court must always remember that “legislation is directed to
practical problems, that the economic mechanism is highly sensitive and complex, that many
problems are singular and contingent, that laws are not abstract propositions and do not relate to
abstract units and are not to be measured by abstract symmetry”; ‘that exact wisdom and nice
adaption of remedy are not always possible’ and that ‘judgment is largely a prophecy based on
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
19
meagre and uninterpreted experience’. Every legislation, particularly in economic matters is
essentially empiric and it is based on experimentation or what one may call trial and error method
and therefore it cannot provide for all possible situations or anticipate all possible abuses. There
may be crudities and inequities in complicated experimental economic legislation but on that
account alone it cannot be struck down as invalid. The courts cannot, as pointed out by the United
States Supreme Court in Secy. of Agriculture v. Central Roig Refining Co. be converted into tribunals
for relief from such crudities and inequities. There may even be possibilities of abuse, but that too
cannot of itself be a ground for invalidating the legislation, because it is not possible for any
legislature to anticipate as if by some divine prescience, distortions and abuses of its legislation
which may be made by those subject to its provisions and to provide against such distortions and
abuses. Indeed, howsoever great may be the care bestowed on its framing, it is difficult to conceive
of a legislation which is not capable of being abused by perverted human ingenuity. The Court must
therefore adjudge the constitutionality of such legislation by the Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019
generality of its provisions and not by its crudities or inequities or by the possibilities of abuse of any
of its provisions. If any crudities, inequities or possibilities of abuse come to light, the legislature can
always step in and enact suitable amendatory legislation. That is the essence of pragmatic approach
which must guide and inspire the legislature in dealing with complex economic issues.
***
19. …. It would be outside the province of the Court to consider if any particular immunity or
exemption is necessary or not for the purpose of inducing disclosure of black money. That would
depend upon diverse fiscal and economic considerations based on practical necessity and
`administrative expediency and would also involve a certain amount of experimentation on which
the Court would be least fitted to pronounce. The Court would not have the necessary competence
and expertise to adjudicate upon such an economic issue. The Court cannot possibly assess or
evaluate what would be the impact of a particular immunity or exemption and whether it would
serve the purpose in view or not. There are so many imponderables that would enter into the
determination that it would be wise for the Court not to hazard an opinion where even economists
may differ. The Court must while examining the constitutional validity of a legislation of this kind,
“be resilient, not rigid, forward looking, not static, liberal, not verbal” and the Court must always
bear in mind the constitutional proposition enunciated by the Supreme Court of the United States in
Munn v. Illinois, namely, ‘that courts do not substitute their social and economic beliefs for the
judgment of legislative bodies’. The Court must defer to legislative judgment in matters relating to
social and economic policies and Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 must not interfere, unless the
exercise of legislative judgment appears to be palpably arbitrary. The Court should constantly
remind itself of what the Supreme Court of the United States said in Metropolis Theater Co. v. City
of Chicago:
“12. … The problems of government are practical ones and may justify, if they do not
require, rough accommodations, illogical it may be, and unscientific. But even such
criticism should not be hastily expressed. What is best is not always discernible, the
wisdom of any choice may be disputed or condemned. Mere error of Government are
not subject to our judicial review.” It is true that one or the other of the immunities or
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
20
exemptions granted under the provisions of the Act may be taken advantage of by
resourceful persons by adopting ingenious methods and devices with a view to
avoiding or saving tax. But that cannot be helped because human ingenuity is so great
when it comes to tax avoidance that it would be almost impossible to frame tax
legislation which cannot be abused. Moreover, as already pointed out above, the trial
and error method is inherent in every legislative effort to deal with an obstinate social
or economic issue and if it is found that any immunity or exemption granted under
the Act is being utilised for tax evasion or avoidance not intended by the legislature,
the Act can always be amended and the abuse terminated. We are accordingly of the
view that none of the provisions of the Act is violative of Article 14 and its
constitutional validity must be upheld.” (emphasis supplied) Writ Petition (C) No.
421 of 2019
22. Likewise, in Bhavesh D. Parish v. Union of India (2000) 5 SCC 471, this Court held :
“26. The services rendered by certain informal sectors of the Indian economy could not be belittled.
However, in the path of economic progress, if the informal system was sought to be replaced by a
more organised system, capable of better regulation and discipline, then this was an economic
philosophy reflected by the legislation in question. Such a philosophy might have its merits and
demerits. But these were matters of economic policy. They are best left to the wisdom of the
legislature and in policy matters the accepted principle is that the courts should not interfere.
Moreover in the context of the changed economic scenario the expertise of people dealing with the
subject should not be lightly interfered with. The consequences of such interdiction can have
large-scale ramifications and can put the clock back for a number of years. The process of
rationalisation of the infirmities in the economy can be put in serious jeopardy and, therefore, it is
necessary that while dealing with economic legislations, this Court, while not jettisoning its
jurisdiction to curb arbitrary action or unconstitutional legislation, should interfere only in those
few cases where the view reflected in the legislation is not possible to be taken at all.
***
30. Before we conclude there is another matter which we must advert to. It has been brought to our
notice that Section 45-S of the Act has been challenged in various High Courts and a few of them
have granted the stay of provisions of Section 45-S. When considering an application for staying the
operation of a piece of legislation, and that too pertaining to economic reform or change, then Writ
Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 the courts must bear in mind that unless the provision is manifestly
unjust or glaringly unconstitutional, the courts must show judicial restraint in staying the
applicability of the same. Merely because a statute comes up for examination and some arguable
point is raised, which persuades the courts to consider the controversy, the legislative will should
not normally be put under suspension pending such consideration. It is now well settled that there is
always a presumption in favour of the constitutional validity of any legislation, unless the same is set
aside after final hearing and, therefore, the tendency to grant stay of legislation relating to economic
reform, at the interim stage, cannot be understood. The system of checks and balances has to be
utilised in a balanced manner with the primary objective of accelerating economic growth rather
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
21
than suspending its growth by doubting its constitutional efficacy at the threshold itself.” (emphasis
supplied)
23. In Directorate General of Foreign Trade v. Kanak Exports, (2016) 2 SCC 226, this Court has held
:
“109. Therefore, it cannot be denied that the Government has a right to amend, modify or even
rescind a particular scheme. It is well settled that in complex economic matters every decision is
necessarily empiric and it is based on experimentation or what one may call trial and error method
and therefore, its validity cannot be tested on any rigid prior considerations or on the application of
any straitjacket formula. In BALCO Employees' Union v. Union of India, (2002) 2 SCC 333] , the
Supreme Court held that laws, including executive action relating to economic activities should be
viewed with greater latitude than laws touching civil rights such as freedom of Writ Petition (C) No.
421 of 2019 speech, religion, etc. that the legislature should be allowed some play in the joints
because it has to deal with complex problems which do not admit of solution through any doctrine
or straitjacket formula and this is particularly true in case of legislation dealing with economic
matters, where having regard to the nature of the problems greater latitude require to be allowed to
the legislature.” **** The raison d'être for the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code ****
27. As is discernible, the Preamble gives an insight into what is sought to be achieved by the Code.
The Code is first and foremost, a Code for reorganisation and insolvency resolution of corporate
debtors. Unless such reorganisation is effected in a time-bound manner, the value of the assets of
such persons will deplete. Therefore, maximisation of value of the assets of such persons so that they
are efficiently run as going concerns is another very important objective of the Code. This, in turn,
will promote entrepreneurship as the persons in management of the corporate debtor are removed
and replaced by entrepreneurs. When, therefore, a resolution plan takes off and the corporate
debtor is brought back into the economic mainstream, it is able to repay its debts, which, in turn,
enhances the viability of credit in the hands of banks and financial institutions. Above all,
ultimately, the interests of all stakeholders are looked after as the corporate debtor itself becomes a
beneficiary of the resolution scheme —workers are paid, the creditors in the long run will be repaid
in full, and shareholders/investors are able to maximise their investment. Timely resolution of a
corporate debtor who is in the red, by an effective legal framework, would go a long way to support
the development of credit markets. Since more Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 investment can be
made with funds that have come back into the economy, business then eases up, which leads,
overall, to higher economic growth and development of the Indian economy. What is interesting to
note is that the Preamble does not, in any manner, refer to liquidation, which is only availed of as a
last resort if there is either no resolution plan or the resolution plans submitted are not up to the
mark. Even in liquidation, the liquidator can sell the business of the corporate debtor as a going
concern. (See ArcelorMittal (India) (P) Ltd. v. Satish Kumar Gupta, (2019) 2 SCC 1 at para 83, fn 3).
**** Epilogue
120. The Insolvency Code is a legislation which deals with economic matters and, in the larger sense,
deals with the economy of the country as a whole. Earlier experiments, as we have seen, in terms of
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
22
legislations having failed, “trial” having led to repeated “errors”, ultimately led to the enactment of
the Code. The experiment contained in the Code, judged by the generality of its provisions and not
by so-called crudities and inequities that have been pointed out by the petitioners, passes
constitutional muster. To stay experimentation in things economic is a grave responsibility, and
denial of the right to experiment is fraught with serious consequences to the nation. We have also
seen that the working of the Code is being monitored by the Central Government by Expert
Committees that have been set up in this behalf. Amendments have been made in the short period in
which the Code has operated, both to the Code itself as well as to subordinate legislation made
under it. This process is an ongoing process which involves all stakeholders, including the
petitioners.
****” Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019
9. As elucidated above, the Companies Act, 2013 does not deal with insolvency and bankruptcy
when the companies are unable to pay their debts or the aspects relating to the revival and
rehabilitation of the companies and their winding up if revival and rehabilitation is not possible. In
principle, it cannot be doubted that the cases of revival or winding up of the company on the ground
of insolvency and inability to pay debts are different from cases where companies are wound up
under Section 271 of the Companies Act 2013. The two situations are not identical. Under Section
271 of the Companies Act, 2013, even a running and financially sound company can also be wound
up for the reasons in clauses (a) to (e). The reasons and grounds for winding up under Section 271 of
the Companies Act, 2013 are vastly different from the reasons and grounds for the revival and
rehabilitation scheme as envisaged under the Code. The two enactments deal with two distinct
situations and in our opinion, they cannot be equated when we examine whether there is
discrimination or violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India. For the revival and
rehabilitation of the companies, certain sacrifices are required from all quarters, including the
workmen. In case of insolvent companies, for the sake of survival and regeneration, Writ Petition
(C) No. 421 of 2019 everyone, including the secured creditors and the Central and State
Government, are required to make sacrifices. The workmen also have a stake and benefit from the
revival of the company, and therefore unless it is found that the sacrifices envisaged for the
workmen, which certainly form a separate class, are onerous and burdensome so as to be manifestly
unjust and arbitrary, we will not set aside the legislation, solely on the ground that some or marginal
sacrifice is to be made by the workers. We would also reject the argument that to find out whether
there was a violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India or whether the right to life under
Article 21 Constitution of India was infringed, we must word by word examine the waterfall
mechanism envisaged under the Companies Act, 2013, where the company is wound up in terms of
grounds (a) to (e) of Section 271 of the Companies Act, 2013; and the rights of the workmen when
the insolvent company is sought to be revived, rehabilitated or wound up under the Code. The
grounds and situations in the context of the objective and purpose of the two enactments are
entirely different.
10. We now turn to the difference in the waterfall mechanism provided in the Companies Act, 2013
and the Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 Code. As per Section 3246 of the Companies Act, 2013, all
debts payable on a contingency, or all claims against the company, present or future, certain or
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
23
contingent, ascertained or sounding only in damages, are admissible to proof against the company.
A just estimate can be made so far as possible in respect of value of such debts or claims as may be
subject to any contingency, damages, etc. and do not bear a certain value. Section 3267 of the
Companies Act, 2013 deals with overriding 6 324. Debts of all descriptions to be admitted to
proof.— In every winding up (subject, in the case of insolvent companies, to the application in
accordance with the provisions of this Act or of the law of insolvency), all debts payable on a
contingency, and all claims against the company, present or future, certain or contingent,
ascertained or sounding only in damages, shall be admissible to proof against the company, a just
estimate being made, so far as possible, of the value of such debts or claims as may be subject to any
contingency, or may sound only in damages, or for some other reason may not bear a certain value.
7 326. Overriding preferential payments.—(1) In the winding up of a company under this Act, the
following debts shall be paid in priority to all other debts:
(a) workmen's dues; and;
(b) where a secured creditor has realised a secured asset, so much of the debts due to such secured
creditor as could not be realised by him or the amount of the workmen's portion in his security (if
payable under the law), whichever is less, pari passu with the workmen's dues:
Provided that in case of the winding up of a company, the sums referred to in sub-clauses (i) and (ii)
of clause (b) of the Explanation, which are payable for a period of two years preceding the winding
up order or such other period as may be prescribed, shall be paid in priority to all other debts
(including debts due to secured creditors), within a period of thirty days of sale of assets and shall be
subject to such charge over the security of secured creditors as may be prescribed.
(2) The debts payable under the proviso to sub-section (1) shall be paid in full before any payment is
made to secured creditors and thereafter debts payable under that sub-section shall be paid in full,
unless the assets are insufficient to meet them, in which case they shall abate in equal proportions.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, and Section 327—
(a) “workmen”, in relation to a company, means the employees of the company, being workmen
within the meaning of clause(s) of Section 2 of the Industrial Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019
preferential payments which have to be paid in priority to all other debts. These include the
workmen debts, and dues of the secured creditor where the secured creditor has realised the secured
asset but could not realise the entire amount, or the amount of workmen’s portion in his security
payable under the law, whichever is less, pari passu with the workmen’s dues. Thus, this balances
and Disputes Act, 1947;
(b) “workmen's dues”, in relation to a company, means the aggregate of the following sums due from
the company to its workmen, namely—
(i) all wages or salary including wages payable for time or piece work and salary earned wholly or in
part by way of commission of any workman in respect of services rendered to the company and any
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
24
compensation payable to any workman under any of the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947;
(ii) all accrued holiday remuneration becoming payable to any workman or, in the case of his death,
to any other person in his right on the termination of his employment before or by the effect of the
winding up order or resolution;
(iii) unless the company is being wound up voluntarily merely for the purposes of reconstruction or
amalgamation with another company or unless the company has, at the commencement of the
winding up, under such a contract with insurers as is mentioned in Section 14 of the Workmen's
Compensation Act, 1923, rights capable of being transferred to and vested in the workmen, all
amount due in respect of any compensation or liability for compensation under the said Act in
respect of the death or disablement of any workman of the company;
(iv) all sums due to any workman from the provident fund, the pension fund, the gratuity fund or
any other fund for the welfare of the workmen, maintained by the company;
(c) “workmen's portion”, in relation to the security of any secured creditor of a company, means the
amount which bears to the value of the security the same proportion as the amount of the
workmen's dues bears to the aggregate of the amount of workmen's dues and the amount of the
debts due to the secured creditors.
Illustration The value of the security of a secured creditor of a company is Rs. 1,00,000. The total
amount of the workmen's dues is Rs. 1,00,000. The amount of the debts due from the company to
its secured creditors is Rs. 3,00,000. The aggregate of the amount of workmen's dues and the
amount of debts due to secured creditors is Rs. 4,00,000. The workmen's portion of the security is,
therefore, one-fourth of the value of the security, that is Rs. 25,000.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 equates the rights of the secured creditor to realise the secured
asset, but in case the secured creditor is not able to realise the full amount or has paid an amount to
the workmen if payable under the law, whichever is less, these dues rank pari passu with the
workmen’s dues. Explanation to Section 326 of the Companies Act, 2013 defines ‘workmen’, which
means employees within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947; and the
expressions “workmen’s dues”; and “workmen’s portion”, which expressions are terms of the
Companies Act, 2013 specially used in clause (b) of sub- section (1) to Section 326 of the Companies
Act, 2013. The workmen’s portion in relation to the security of any secured creditor of a company
means the amount which bears to the value of security, the same proportion as the amount of
workmen’s dues bears to the aggregate of the amount of workmen’s dues and the amount of debts
due to the secured creditors. The illustration clarifies the formula by way of an hypothetical case,
where the secured creditors and workmen’s dues are both Rs.1 lakh. The amount of the debts due
from the company to the secured creditors is hypothetically taken as Rs. 3 lakhs. Accordingly, the
aggregate amount due towards workmen’s dues and the amount of debts due to the Writ Petition (C)
No. 421 of 2019 secured creditors is Rs. 4 lakhs. In this background, when the value of the security
of the secured creditors is Rs. 1 lakh, one-fourth of the value of the security, i.e. Rs.25,000/- would
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
25
be the workmen’s portion. To this extent, there is no difficulty or dispute. As noticed below there is
hardly any difference in the said hierarchy and the waterfall mechanism under the Code.
11. However, the proviso to sub-section (1) to Section 326 of the Companies Act, 2013 states that in
case of winding up of the company, the sums referred to in sub- clauses (i) and (ii) to clause (b) of
the Explanation to Section 326 of the Companies Act, 2013, which are payable for a period of two
years preceding the winding up order or such other period as may be prescribed, shall be paid in
priority to all other debts, including debts due to secured creditors. This payment is to be made
within a period of thirty days from the sale of assets and shall be subject to such charge over the
security of the secured creditors. Sub-clause (i) to clause (b) of the Explanation to Section 326 of the
Companies Act, 2013 refers to all wages or salary, including wages payable for time or piece work
and salary earned wholly or in part, etc. under any provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
Sub- clause (ii) to clause (b) of the Explanation to Section 326 Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 of
the Companies Act, 2013 deals with all accrued holiday remuneration payable to any workmen or, in
the case of his death, to any other person in his right on termination of his employment, etc.
Sub-clauses (iii) and (iv) of clause
(b) of the Explanation to Section 326 of the Companies Act, 2013 are excluded from the proviso.
These sub- clauses deal with liability of compensation under the Workmen’s Compensation Act,
1923 in respect of death or disablement of the workmen or all sums due to any workman from the
provident fund, the pension fund, the gratuity fund or any other fund of the welfare of the
workmen8. What is clear from the provision is that the proviso applies in case of winding up of a
company to the sums referred to in sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (b) of the Explanation to Section
326 of the Companies Act, 2013 which are payable for a period of two years preceding the winding
up order or such other period as may be prescribed. We are not informed that a different period has
been prescribed and, therefore, the sums referred to in sub-clauses (i) and (ii) to clause (b) of the
Explanation to Section 326 of the Companies Act, 2013 8 For the purpose of the present decision,
we are not required to comment on the provisions of the Employees’ Provident Funds and
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 and the payment of workmen’s dues under the Companies
Act,1956 or even Section 36 (4)(a)(iii) of the Code. However, see - Employees Provident Fund
Commissioner v. Official Liquidator of Esskay Pharmaceuticals Limited, (2011) 10 SCC 727 and
Bhupinder Singh v. Unitech Limited, (2022) 8 SCC 749.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 are payable for two years preceding the winding up order. Thus,
this period of two years is with reference to the date of the winding up order, and not with reference
to the date earlier in point of time, that is, when a winding up petition is filed. This restricts the
period for which payment under sub-clauses (i) and (ii) to clause (b) of the Explanation to Section
326 of the Companies Act, 2013 would apply. Entire unpaid dues are not covered by the proviso to
sub- section (1) to Section 326 of the Companies Act, 2013.
12. When we turn our attention to the Code, it is to be first noted that in terms of Section
36(4)(a)(iii) of the Code, all sums due to any workman or employee from the provident fund, the
pension fund and the gratuity fund, do not form part and are not to be included in the liquidation
proceedings.9 Sub-section (1) to Section 52 of the Code gives two options to a secured creditor. First,
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
26
the secured creditor in a liquidation proceeding may relinquish its security interest and receive the
proceeds from the sale of assets by the liquidator in the manner specified in Section 9 For the
purpose of the present decision, we are not interpreting sub-clause (iii) to clause (a) of sub-section
(4) to Section 36 of the Code as this is an issue of some debate and pending consideration in other
matters. The legal effect of exclusion is that, the amount of sums due to any workmen or employee
from the provident fund, the pension fund or the gratuity fund cannot be made subject matter of
reduction or dilution even in a rehabilitation or revival plan. They are excluded from the waterfall
mechanism and would not be used in recovery on liquidation, and they cannot be shared.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 53 of the Code. The second option is to realise the security interest,
but in the manner specified in Section 52 of the Code. Sub-section (2) to Section 52 of the Code
states that where the secured creditor realises the security interest, he shall inform the liquidator of
such security interest and identify the asset subject to such security interest to be realised. The
liquidator is to verify the security interest and shall permit the secured creditor to realise such
security interest, which is proved either by records of such security interest maintained by an
information utility, or by such other means as may be specified by the Board. Sub-section (4) to
Section 52 of the Code states that the secured creditor may enforce, realise, settle, compromise or
deal with the secured asset in accordance with such law as applicable to the security interest being
realised and to the secured creditor. The secured creditor is to accordingly apply the proceeds to
recover the debts due to him. We need not refer to sub- section (5) to Section 52 of the Code as it
relates to the action which the secured creditor may take if he faces resistance from the corporate
debtor or any other person connected therewith in taking possession of, selling or otherwise
disposing off the security. Sub-section (6) to Section 52 of the Code applies when an adjudicating
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 authority is in receipt of an application under sub-section (5) to
Section 52 of the Code. Sub-section (7) to Section 52 of the Code, however, is important as it states
that where on enforcement of the security interest, an amount by way of proceeds is in excess of the
debts due to the secured creditor, the secured creditor shall account for and pay the excess/surplus
amount to the liquidator from enforcement of such secured assets. The amount of insolvency
resolution process costs, due from secured creditors who realise their security interests in the
manner provided in the section, are to be deducted from the proceeds of any realisation by such
secured creditors. They are to be transferred and included in the liquidation estate. Sub-section (9)
to Section 52 of the Code states that where proceeds for realisation of the secured assets are not
adequate to repay the debts owed to the secured creditor, the unpaid debts of such secured creditor
shall be paid by the liquidator in the manner specified in clause
(e) to sub-section (1) to Section 53 of the Code.
13. To protect the interest of the workmen where the secured creditor does not relinquish its security
interest to fall under Section 53 of the Code, Regulation 21A 10 of the 10 21A. Presumption of
security interest.— (1) A secured creditor shall inform the liquidator of its decision to relinquish its
security interest to the liquidation estate or realise its security interest, as the case may be, in Form
C or Form D of Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India
(Liquidation Process) Regulations, 2016 has been enacted, and it requires that the secured creditor,
who opts to realise its security interest as per section 52 of the Code, has to pay as much towards the
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
27
amount payable under the clause (a) and sub-clause (i) to clause (b) of sub-section (1) to Section 53
of the Code to the liquidator within the time and the manner stipulated therein. The workmen’s
dues, even when the secured creditor opts to proceed under Section 52 of the Code, are therefore
protected in terms of sub-clause (b) of sub-section (1) to Section 53 of the Code.
Schedule II:
Provided that, where a secured creditor does not intimate its decision within thirty days from the
liquidation commencement date, the assets covered under the security interest shall be presumed to
be part of the liquidation estate.
(2) Where a secured creditor proceeds to realise its security interest, it shall pay -
(a) as much towards the amount payable under clause (a) and sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of section 53, as it would have shared in case it had relinquished the security interest,
to the liquidator within ninety days from the liquidation commencement date; and
(b) the excess of the realised value of the asset, which is subject to security interest, over the amount
of his claims admitted, to the liquidator within one hundred and eighty days from the liquidation
commencement date:
Provided that where the amount payable under this sub-regulation is not certain by the date the
amount is payable under this sub-regulation, the secured creditor shall pay the amount, as
estimated by the liquidator:
Provided further that any difference between the amount payable under this sub-regulation and the
amount paid under the first proviso shall be made good by the secured creditor or the liquidator, as
the case may be, as soon as the amount payable under this sub-regulation is certain and so informed
by the liquidator.
(3) Where a secured creditor fails to comply with sub-regulation (2), the asset, which is subject to
security interest, shall become part of the liquidation estate.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019
14. Before we refer to Section 53 of the Code, we would like to take note of Section 30 of the Code,
which relates to the submission of resolution plan, which is required to be examined by the
resolution professional in the manner stipulated in sub-section (2) to Section 30 11 of the Code.
Substantial part of clause (b) of sub-section (2) to Section 11 30. Submission of resolution plan.—(1)
A resolution applicant may submit a resolution plan along with an affidavit stating that he is eligible
under Section 29-A to the resolution professional prepared on the basis of the information
memorandum.
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
28
(2) The resolution professional shall examine each resolution plan received by him to confirm that
each resolution plan—
(a) provides for the payment of insolvency resolution process costs in a manner specified by the
Board in priority to the payment of other debts of the corporate debtor;
(b) provides for the payment of debts of operational creditors in such manner as may be specified by
the Board which shall not be less than—
(i) the amount to be paid to such creditors in the event of a liquidation of the corporate debtor under
Section 53; or
(ii) the amount that would have been paid to such creditors, if the amount to be distributed under
the resolution plan had been distributed in accordance with the order of priority in sub-section (1) of
Section 53, whichever is higher, and provides for the payment of debts of financial creditors, who do
not vote in favour of the resolution plan, in such manner as may be specified by the Board, which
shall not be less than the amount to be paid to such creditors in accordance with sub-section (1) of
Section 53 in the event of a liquidation of the corporate debtor.
Explanation 1.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that a distribution in accordance
with the provisions of this clause shall be fair and equitable to such creditors.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this clause, it is hereby declared that on and from the date of
commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2019, the provisions of
this clause shall also apply to the corporate insolvency resolution process of a corporate debtor—
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 30 of the Code relates to the payment of debts of operational
creditors, which is not relevant for us. However, the later portion of clause (b) of sub-section (2) to
Section 30 of the Code provides for the payment of debts of financial creditors who do not vote in
favour of the resolution plan. The amount payable to them, it stipulates, shall not be less than the
amount to be paid to such creditors in accordance with sub-section (1) to Section 53 of the Code in
the event of a liquidation of the corporate debtor. Sub-section (4) to Section 30 of the Code states
when and how a Committee of Creditors is to approve the resolution plan. Sub-section (6) states
that
(i) where a resolution plan has not been approved or rejected by the Adjudicating Authority;
(ii) where an appeal has been preferred under Section 61 or Section 62 or such an appeal is not time
barred under any provision of law for the time being in force; or
(iii) where a legal proceeding has been initiated in any court against the decision of the Adjudicating
Authority in respect of a resolution plan;
(c) provides for the management of the affairs of the corporate debtor after approval of the
resolution plan;
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
29
(d) the implementation and supervision of the resolution plan;
(e) does not contravene any of the provisions of the law for the time being in force;
(f) conforms to such other requirements as may be specified by the Board.
Explanation.—For the purposes of clause (e), if any approval of shareholders is required under the
Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) or any other law for the time being in force for the
implementation of actions under the resolution plan, such approval shall be deemed to have been
given and it shall not be a contravention of that Act or law.
**** Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 the resolution professional shall submit the resolution plan as
approved by the Committee of Creditors to the adjudicating authority. Section 31 12 of the Code
relates to approval of the resolution plan. The adjudicating authority is to satisfy that the resolution
plan as approved by the Committee of Creditors under sub-section (4) of Section 30 of the Code,
meets the requirements as referred to in sub-section (2) to Section 30 of the Code. Further, the
resolution plan has provisions for its effective implementation. Sub-section (2) to Section 31 of the
Code states that where the adjudicating authority is satisfied that the resolution plan does not
confirm to the requirements referred to in sub-section (1) to Section 31 of the Code, it may by an
order reject the resolution plan.
12 31. Approval of resolution plan.—(1) If the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that the resolution
plan as approved by the committee of creditors under sub- section (4) of Section 30 meets the
requirements as referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 30, it shall by order approve the resolution
plan which shall be binding on the corporate debtor and its employees, members, creditors,
including the Central Government, any State Government or any local authority to whom a debt in
respect of the payment of dues arising under any law for the time being in force, such as authorities
to whom statutory dues are owed, guarantors and other stakeholders involved in the resolution
plan: Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall, before passing an order for approval of
resolution plan under this sub-section, satisfy that the resolution plan has provisions for its effective
implementation.
(2) Where the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that the resolution plan does not confirm to the
requirements referred to in sub-section (1), it may, by an order, reject the resolution plan.
**** Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 We need not refer to other sub-sections of Section 31 of the
Code.
15. We now turn our attention to Section 53 of the Code which begins with a non-obstante clause
and states that notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law enacted by the
Parliament or any State Legislature for the time being in force, the proceeds from the sale of
liquidation assets shall be distributed in the order of priority, which is stipulated, and within such
period and such manner as may be specified. The consequence of sub-section (1) to Section 53 of the
Code is that it will override the rights of parties, including the secured creditor, when the said
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
30
provision applies. Section 53 of the Code is the complete and comprehensive code which ensures
collection of assets and then provides the manner in which the creditors are to be paid. Even the
rights of the secured creditor falling under Section 53 of the Code to enforce, realise, settle,
compromise or deal with the secured assets as applicable to the security interest are diluted and
compromised.
15.1 Clause (a) to sub-section (1) to Section 53 deals with insolvency resolution process costs and the
liquidation costs which are to be paid in full. No grievance or issue can be raised in respect of the
said clause.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 Clause (b) to sub-section (1) to Section 53 states that the debts due
in the form of workmen’s dues for a period of twenty four months preceding the liquidation
commencement date and the debts owed to the secured creditor in the event such secured creditor
has relinquished security in the manner set out in Section 52 of the Code shall rank equally between
and amongst the workmen and the secured creditors. The Explanation to Section 53 of the Code
states that ‘workmen’s dues’ shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in Section 326 of the
Companies Act, 2013. In other words, Explanation to Section 326 of the Companies Act, 2013 has
been incorporated and applies to the waterfall mechanism as prescribed in clause (b) to sub-section
(1) to Section 53 of the Code. What is significant here is that under clause (b) to sub-section (1) to
Section 53 of the Code, the workmen’s dues are for the period of twenty four months preceding the
liquidation commencement date. The liquidation commencement date, as defined in terms of
sub-section (17) to Section 5 of the Code, is much earlier in point of time and need not coincide with
the date of winding up. This is in the interest of the workmen. Clause
(i) of Explanation to Section 53 of the Code states that where the distribution of proceeds in respect
of class of Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 recipients that rank equally, each of the debts would be
paid either in full or would be paid in equal proportion within the same class of recipients, if the
proceeds are insufficient to meet the debts in full. Ex facie, the clause is very just and fair. It is to be
noted that the wages and unpaid dues owed to employees other than the workmen fall in clause (c),
which is below clause (b) to sub-section (1) to Section 53 of the Code. They are to be paid wages and
unpaid dues only for a period of twelve months preceding the liquidation commencement date, and
that too only if surplus funds are available after making payment in terms of clause (a) and (b) of
sub-section (1) to Section 53 of the Code. Clause (d) of sub-section (1) to Section 53 of the Code
relates to financial debts owed to unsecured creditors. The amounts due to the Central Government
and the State Government, etc., and the debts owed to a secured creditor for any amount that
remains unpaid following the enforcement of security interest, have been clubbed together in clause
(e) of sub- section (1) to Section 53 of the Code, and have to be ranked equally between and among
both of them. The remaining debts and dues fall in clause (f) of sub-section (1) to Section 53 of the
Code. Preference shareholders fall under clause (g) of sub-section (1) to Section 53 of the Writ
Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 Code, and equity shareholders or partners fall under clause (h) of
sub-section (1) to Section 53 of the Code. Sub-section (2) to Section 53 of the Code states that any
contractual arrangements between recipients under sub- section (1) with equal ranking, if disrupting
the order of priority under the said sub-section will be disregarded by the liquidator.
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
31
16. The waterfall mechanism is based on a structured mathematical formula, and the hierarchy is
created in terms of payment of debts in order of priority with several qualifications, striking down
any one of the provisions or rearranging the hierarchy in the waterfall mechanism may lead to
several trips and disrupt the working of the equilibrium as a whole and stasis, resulting in
instability. Every change in the waterfall mechanism is bound to lead to cascading effects on the
balance of rights and interests of the secured creditors, operational creditors and even the Central
and State Governments. Depending upon the facts, in some cases, the waterfall mechanism in the
Code may be more beneficial than the hierarchy provided under Section 326 of the Companies Act,
2013 and vice-versa. Therefore, we hesitate and do not accept the arguments of the petitioners.
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019
17. The Code is based on the organic evolution of law and is a product of an extensive consultative
process to meet the requirements of the Code governing liquidation. It introduced a comprehensive
and time-bound framework to maximise the value of assets of all persons and balance the interest of
the stakeholders. The guiding principle for the Code in setting the priority of payments in
liquidation was to bring the practices in India in line with global practices. In the waterfall
mechanism, after the costs of the insolvency resolution process and liquidation, secured creditors
share the highest priority along with a defined period of dues of the workmen. The unpaid dues of
the workmen are adequately and significantly protected in line with the objectives sought to be
achieved by the Code and in terms of the waterfall mechanism prescribed by Section 53 of the Code.
In either case of relinquishment or non-relinquishment of the security by the secured creditor, the
interests of workmen are protected under the Code. In fact, the secured creditors are taking
significant hair-cut and workmen are being compensated on an equitable basis in a just and proper
manner as per Section 53 of the Code. The Code balances the rights of the secured creditors, who are
financial institutions in which the general public has Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019 invested
money, and also ensures that the economic activity and revival of a viable company is not hindered
because it has suffered or fallen into a financial crisis. The Code focuses on bringing additional gains
to both the economy and the exchequer through efficiency enhancement and consequent greater
value capture. In economic matters, a wider latitude is given to the law- maker and the Court allows
for experimentation in such legislations based on practical experiences and other problems seen by
the law-makers. In a challenge to such legislation, the Court does not adopt a doctrinaire approach.
Some sacrifices have to be always made for the greater good, and unless such sacrifices are prima
facie apparent and ex facie harsh and unequitable as to classify as manifestly arbitrary, these would
be interfered with by the court.
18. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above and as sub-section (7) of Section 327 of the
Act, 2013 provides that Sections 326 and 327 of the Act, 2013 shall not be applicable in the event of
liquidation under the IBC, which has been necessitated in view of the enactment of IBC and it
applies with respect to the liquidation of a company under the IBC, Section 327(7) of Writ Petition
(C) No. 421 of 2019 the Act, 2013 cannot be said to be arbitrary and/or violative of Article 21 of the
Constitution of India. In case of the liquidation of a company under the IBC, the distribution of the
assets shall have to be made as per Section 53 of the IBC subject to Section 36(4) of the IBC, in case
of liquidation of company under IBC.
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
32
19. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the writ petition(s) lack merits and the
same deserve to be dismissed and are accordingly dismissed. However, in the facts and
circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.
………………………………….J.
                                   [M.R. SHAH]
NEW DELHI;                     ………………………………….J.
MAY 02, 2023.                     [SANJIV KHANNA]
Writ Petition (C) No. 421 of 2019
Moser Baer Karamchari Union Thr. ... vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94292477/
33
