Supreme Court of India
Ntpc Ltd. vs M/S Spml Infra Ltd. on 10 April, 2023
Author: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench: Hon'Ble The Justice, Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha, J.B. Pardiwala
                                                                      REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                   CIVIL APPEAL No. 4778 of 2022
          NTPC LTD.                                                   ....APPELLANT
                                                VERSUS
          M/S SPML INFRA LTD.                                       ...RESPONDENT
                                            JUDGMENT
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J.
1. The present appeal arises out of a decision of the High Court of Delhi1, allowing the Respondent’s
application under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 19962 for the constitution of
an Arbitral Tribunal. It is the case of Appellant NTPC that there were no subsisting disputes between
the parties in view of the Settlement Agreement dated 27.05.2020 and that the application for
arbitration is an afterthought and abuse of the process.
2. By an order dated 15.07.2022, this Court, while granting leave, stayed all further proceedings
before the Arbitral Tribunal. Signature Not Verified Digitally signed by Sanjay Kumar Date:
2023.04.10 13:30:12 IST Reason:
2 hereinafter ‘the Act’.
Short facts giving rise to the filing of the petition under Section 11 of the Act and leading to the
impugned decision of the High Court are as follows.
3. Facts: The Appellant and Respondent, hereinafter referred to as NTPC and SPML respectively,
entered into a contract for “Installation Services for Station Piping Package for Simhadri Super
Thermal Power Project Stage II at NTPC at Simhadri, Vishakapatnam”. In terms of the contract
agreement, SPML furnished Performance Bank Guarantees and Advanced Bank Guarantees3 for Rs.
14,96,89,136/- to secure the Appellant.
4. Pursuant to the successful completion of the project, a Completion Certificate was issued by NTPC
on 27.03.2019. By its letter dated 10.04.2019, NTPC informed SPML that the final payment under
the contract would be released upon the receipt of a No-Demand Certificate from SPML. The
No-Demand Certificate was issued by SPML on 12.04.2019 and NTPC also released the final
payment amounting to Rs. 1,40,00,000/- in April 2019. The Bank Guarantees were however
Ntpc Ltd. vs M/S Spml Infra Ltd. on 10 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197054318/
1
withheld.
3 hereinafter referred to as ‘Bank Guarantees’.
5. On 14.05.2019, NTPC informed SPML that the Bank Guarantees were withheld on account of
pending liabilities and disputes between the parties with respect to other projects at Bongaigon,
Barh, and Korba. SPML naturally protested. By its letter dated 15.05.2019, SPML informed NTPC
that the retention of Bank Guarantees, despite issuance of the Completion Certificate and the
No-Demand Certificate, by linking them to some other projects, was unjustified. Following the
protest, SPML raised a demand of Rs. 72,01,53,899/- from NTPC as liabilities recoverable for
actions attributable to NTPC under this very contract.
6. By its letter dated 12.06.2019, SPML called upon NTPC to appoint an Adjudicator for resolving
pending disputes in terms of the General and Special Conditions of Contract. As no action was taken
by NTPC, SPML moved the Delhi High Court by filing Writ Petition No. 7213 of 2019 under Article
226 of the Constitution, for the release of the Bank Guarantees. The prayer in the Writ Petition is to:
“(a) Pass an appropriate Writ, Order or Direction quashing the e-mail dated
14.05.2019 issued by the Respondent insofar as it pertains to the release of the Bank
Guarantees being (a) 0040ILG002609, (b) 0040ILG001109, (C) 0040ILG001209,
(d) 0040ILG001309 and direct the Respondent to release the aforesaid Bank
Guarantees forthwith, and
(b) Pass any other order or such other orders as may be necessary in the interests of
justice, equity and good conscience.”
7. While issuing notice, the High Court, by its interim order dated 08.07.2019, directed NTPC not to
encash the Bank Guarantees, and further directed SPML to keep the Bank Guarantees alive.
8. Pending the Writ Petition, negotiations between the parties culminated in a Settlement
Agreement on 27.05.2020. Through the Settlement Agreement, NTPC agreed to release the withheld
Bank Guarantees. SPML also agreed to withdraw its pending Writ Petition and undertook not to
initiate any other proceedings, including arbitration, under the subject contract.
9. Following the Settlement Agreement, the Bank Guarantees were released by NTPC on
30.06.2020. SPML withdrew the Writ Petition, as recorded in the Order of the Delhi High Court
dated 21.09.2020.
10. After the aforesaid settlement of the disputes, followed by its implementation, SPML repudiated
the Settlement Agreement and filed the present application under Section 11(6) of the Act in the
Delhi High Court on 10.10.20204. In this Arbitration Petition, SPML alleged coercion and economic
duress in the execution of the Settlement Agreement. The allegation was, that the retention of the
Bank Guarantees compelled SPML to accept the terms of Settlement Agreement. SPML also averred
that NTPC had failed to appoint an arbitrator in spite of repeated requests, and therefore the High
Ntpc Ltd. vs M/S Spml Infra Ltd. on 10 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197054318/
2
Court must constitute an Arbitral Tribunal, in exercise of its jurisdiction under the Act.
11. In its reply to the Arbitration Petition, NTPC raised two-fold objections. Firstly, that SPML failed
to follow the mandatory pre- arbitration procedure of first referring the disputes to an Adjudicator
as per the terms of the Dispute Resolution Clause5. 4 Clause 6.2 of the General Conditions of
Contract is as under:
“6.2 Arbitration 6.2.1 If either the Employer or the Contractor is dissatisfied with the
Adjudicator’s decision, or if the Adjudicator fails to give a decision within twenty
eight (28) days of a dispute being referred to it, then either the Employer or the
Contractor may, within fifty six (56) days of such reference, give notice to the other
party, with a copy for information to the Adjudicator of its intention to commence
arbitration, as hereinafter provided, as to the matter in dispute, and no arbitration in
respect of this matter may be commenced unless such notice is given.” 5 Dispute
resolution was provided under clause 6.1 of the General Conditions of Contract and
clause 3 of Special Conditions of Contract; hereinafter ‘the Dispute Resolution
Clause’;
Clause 6.1 of the General Conditions of Contract is as under: “6. Settlement of Disputes 6.1
Adjudicator 6.1.1 If any dispute of any kind whatsoever shall arise between the Employer and the
Contractor in connection with or arising out of the Contract, including without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing, any question regarding its existence, validity or termination, or the
execution of the Facilities- whether during the progress of the Facilities or after their completion
and whether before or after the termination, abandonment or breach of the Contract- the parties
shall seek to resolve any such dispute or difference by mutual consultation. If the parties fail to
resolve such a dispute or difference by mutual consultation, then the dispute shall be referred in
writing by either party to the Adjudicator, with a copy to the other party.” Secondly, that the
disputes between the parties were settled by virtue of the Settlement Agreement dated 27.05.2020.
Acting under the Settlement Agreement, NTPC released the Bank Guarantees and SPML also
proceeded to withdraw the Writ Petition, and therefore, there was discharge of the contract by
accord and satisfaction. The allegations of coercion and economic duress were denied as false, as all
events occurred during the subsistence of proceedings before the Delhi High Court, and the parties
willingly complied with the terms of the Settlement Agreement. Further, the demand of Rs.
72,01,53,899/- was an afterthought, never raised during the subsistence of the contract. Under these
circumstances, NTPC submitted that the application under Section 11(6) of the Act must be rejected.
12. High Court: The High Court examined the correspondence between the parties in detail. It
rejected the first contention of NTPC that SPML should have first resorted to an alternative dispute
resolution mechanism under the Dispute Resolution Clause. It noted that such a request was, in
fact, made by SPML on an earlier occasion, but NTPC failed to respond to the same. On the request
for arbitration and the allegation of economic duress that allegedly prevailed in signing the
Settlement Agreement, the High Court observed that:
Ntpc Ltd. vs M/S Spml Infra Ltd. on 10 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197054318/
3
“66. SPML had invoked the arbitration clause and had sought reference of disputes to
arbitration. It had also approached this Court. Thus, it would be difficult for SPML to
establish that it was economically coerced to enter into the Settlement Agreement.
However, this Court is unable to accept that the dispute whether the Contract
Agreement stood discharged/novated in terms of the Settlement Agreement, is ex
facie untenable, insubstantial or frivolous.” (emphasis supplied)
13. After referring to the decisions of this Court in Mayavati Trading (P) Ltd. v. Pradyuat Deb
Burman6, Vidya Drolia and Ors. v. Durga Trading Corporation7, Duro Felguera, S.A. v. Gangavaram
Port Ltd.8, Sanjiv Prakash v. Seema Kukreja and Ors.9, and Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. and Anr. v.
Dicitex Furnishing Ltd.10, the High Court allowed the Arbitration Petition. It appointed a former
Judge of the Delhi High Court as the Arbitrator on behalf of NTPC, and directed the respective
arbitrators to appoint the presiding Arbitrator.
14. Submissions by the Parties: Shri Adarsh Tripathi, Advocate appearing with and on behalf of the
Solicitor General, for NTPC, 6 (2019) 8 SCC 714.
7 (2021) 2 SCC 1. (hereinafter ‘Vidya Drolia’) 8 (2017) 9 SCC 729.
9 (2021) 9 SCC 732.
10 (2020) 4 SCC 621.
submitted that the Settlement Agreement dated 27.05.2020 was arrived at during the pendency of
the Writ Petition before the High Court. The allegations of coercion and economic duress were,
therefore, false and unbelievable. He also submitted that SPML never raised claims during the
subsistence of the contract, before the Completion Certificate was issued, or even before the final
payment was made. Further, the conduct of SPML, in waiting for the release of the Bank Guarantees
as per the Settlement Agreement before withdrawing the Writ Petition, and thereafter instituting the
Arbitration Petition, clearly demonstrated that the allegation of coercion was not bona fide. Finally,
he submitted that the High Court was under an obligation to undertake a limited scrutiny to
examine whether a matter is prima facie arbitrable. For this purpose, he relied on a recent decision
of this Court in Emaar India Ltd. v. Tarun Aggarwal Projects LLP & Anr11.
15. Shri Jaideep Gupta, Advocate appearing for the Respondent, SPML, has submitted that the legal
principles governing an application under Section 11(6) of the Act are well-settled following the
decisions of this Court in Mayavati Trading (supra) and Vidya Drolia (supra). At the pre-referral
stage, the jurisdiction of the court 11 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1328.
is restricted to the examination of whether an arbitration agreement exists between the parties. He
submitted that the decision of the High Court was unexceptionable, since the question as to whether
the Settlement Agreement was executed under undue influence or coercion could be determined by
an Arbitral Tribunal.
Ntpc Ltd. vs M/S Spml Infra Ltd. on 10 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197054318/
4
16. Position of Law: In the present case, we are concerned with the pre-referral jurisdiction of the
High Court under Section 11 of the Act and would like to underscore the limited scope within which
an application under Section 11(6)12 of the Act has to be considered.
17. The position of law with respect to the pre-referral jurisdiction, as it existed before the advent of
Section 11(6A) in the Act, was based on a well-articulated principle formulated by this Court in
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Boghara Polyfab (P) Ltd13. In Boghara Polyfab, this Court held that
the issue of non-arbitrability 12 Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996 (Act 26 of 1996), Section
11(6):
"(6) Where, under an appointment procedure agreed upon by the parties,—
(a) a party fails to act as required under that procedure; or
(b) the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators, fail to reach an agreement expected
of them under that procedure; or
(c) a person, including an institution, fails to perform any function entrusted to him
or it under that procedure, a party may request 1 [the Supreme Court or, as the case
may be, the High Court or any person or institution designated by such Court]to take
the necessary measure, unless the agreement on the appointment procedure provides
other means for securing the appointment.” 13 (2009) 1 SCC 267.
of a dispute will have to be examined by the court in cases where accord and discharge of the
contract is alleged. Following the principle in Boghara Polyfab, this Court in Union of India & Ors. v.
Master Construction Co.14 observed that when the validity of a discharge voucher, no-claim
certificate or a settlement agreement is in dispute, the court must prima facie examine the
credibility of the allegations before referring the parties to arbitration. Yet again in New India
Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Genus Power Infrastructure Ltd.15, this Court observed that allegations of
fraud, coercion, duress or undue influence must be prima facie substantiated through evidence by
the party raising the allegations. 14 (2011) 12 SCC 349:
“18. In our opinion, there is no rule of the absolute kind. In a case where the claimant
contends that a discharge voucher or no-claim certificate has been obtained by fraud,
coercion, duress or undue influence and the other side contests the correctness
thereof, the Chief Justice/his designate must look into this aspect to find out at least,
prima facie, whether or not the dispute is bona fide and genuine. Where the dispute
raised by the claimant with regard to validity of the discharge voucher or no-claim
certificate or settlement agreement, prima facie, appears to be lacking in credibility,
there may not be a necessity to refer the dispute for arbitration at all.” 15 (2015) 2
SCC 424:
“10. In our considered view, the plea raised by the respondent is bereft of any details
and particulars, and cannot be anything but a bald assertion. Given the fact that there
Ntpc Ltd. vs M/S Spml Infra Ltd. on 10 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197054318/
5
was no protest or demur raised around the time or soon after the letter of
subrogation was signed, that the notice dated 31-3-2011 itself was nearly after three
weeks and that the financial condition of the respondent was not so precarious that it
was left with no alternative but to accept the terms as suggested, we are of the firm
view that the discharge in the present case and signing of letter of subrogation were
not because of exercise of any undue influence. Such discharge and signing of letter of
subrogation was voluntary and free from any coercion or undue influence. In the
circumstances, we hold that upon execution of the letter of subrogation, there was
full and final settlement of the claim. Since our answer to the question, whether there
was really accord and satisfaction, is in the affirmative, in our view no arbitrable
dispute existed so as to exercise power under Section 11 of the Act. The High Court
was not therefore justified in exercising power under Section 11 of the Act.”
18. In a legislative response to these precedents, through the Arbitration and
Conciliation (Amendment) Act 2015,16 sub-section (6A) was added to Section 11 of
the Act, which reads as follows:
“(6-A) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court, while considering
any application under sub- section (4) or sub-section (5) or sub-section (6), shall,
notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, confine to the
examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement.” (emphasis supplied)
19. Taking cognizance of the legislative change, this Court in Duro Felguera (supra),
noted that post the 2015 Amendments, the jurisdiction of the court under Section
11(6) of the Act is limited to examining whether an arbitration agreement exists
between the parties – “nothing more, nothing less”17.
20. However, in the year 2019, in United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Antique Art Exports Pvt.
Ltd.18, this Court had nevertheless 16 Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act 2015 (Act 3 of
2016); hereinafter referred to as ‘the 2015 Amendments’.
17 Duro Felguera supra note 7, para 59 (concurring opinion of Kurian Joseph, J). 18 (2019) 5 SCC
362:
“21. In the instant case, prima facie no dispute subsisted after the discharge voucher
being signed by the respondent without any demur or protest and claim being finally
settled with accord and satisfaction and after 11 weeks of the settlement of claim a
letter was sent on 27-7-2016 for the first time raising a voice in the form of protest
that the discharge voucher was signed under undue influence and coercion with no
supportive prima facie evidence being placed on record in absence thereof, it must
follow that the claim had been settled with accord and satisfaction leaving no arbitral
dispute subsisting under the agreement to be referred to the arbitrator for
adjudication.
Ntpc Ltd. vs M/S Spml Infra Ltd. on 10 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197054318/
6
22. In our considered view, the High Court has committed a manifest error in passing the impugned
order and adopting a mechanical process in appointing the arbitrator without any supportive
evidence on record to prima facie substantiate that an arbitral dispute subsisted under the
agreement which needed to be referred to the arbitrator for adjudication.” accepted an objection of
‘accord and satisfaction’ in opposition to an application for reference to arbitration.
21. It did not take much time for this Court to reverse the approach in Antique Art Exports (supra).
A three-judge bench in Mayavati Trading (supra) expressly overruled the above-referred decision in
Antique Art Exports, observing that:
“10. This being the position, it is clear that the law prior to the 2015 Amendment that
has been laid down by this Court, which would have included going into whether
accord and satisfaction has taken place, has now been legislatively overruled. This
being the position, it is difficult to agree with the reasoning contained in the aforesaid
judgment, as Section 11(6-A) is confined to the examination of the existence of an
arbitration agreement and is to be understood in the narrow sense as has been laid
down in the judgment in Duro Felguera, SA.”
22. The entire case law on the subject was considered by a three- judge bench of this Court in Vidya
Drolia (supra), and an overarching principle with respect to the pre-referral jurisdiction under
Section 11(6) of the Act was laid down. The relevant portion of the judgment is as follows:
“153. Accordingly, we hold that the expression “existence of an arbitration
agreement” in Section 11 of the Arbitration Act, would include aspect of validity of an
arbitration agreement, albeit the court at the referral stage would apply the prima
facie test on the basis of principles set out in this judgment. In cases of debatable and
disputable facts, and good reasonable arguable case, etc., the court would force the
parties to abide by the arbitration agreement as the Arbitral Tribunal has primary
jurisdiction and authority to decide the disputes including the question of jurisdiction
and non-
arbitrability.
154. Discussion under the heading “Who Decides Arbitrability?” can be crystallised as under: 154.1.
Ratio of the decision in Patel Engg. Ltd. [SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618] on the
scope of judicial review by the court while deciding an application under Sections 8 or 11 of the
Arbitration Act, post the amendments by Act 3 of 2016 (with retrospective effect from 23-10-2015)
and even post the amendments vide Act 33 of 2019 (with effect from 9-8-2019), is no longer
applicable.
154.2. Scope of judicial review and jurisdiction of the court under Sections 8 and 11 of the
Arbitration Act is identical but extremely limited and restricted. 154.3. The general rule and
principle, in view of the legislative mandate clear from Act 3 of 2016 and Act 33 of 2019, and the
principle of severability and competence-competence, is that the Arbitral Tribunal is the preferred
Ntpc Ltd. vs M/S Spml Infra Ltd. on 10 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197054318/
7
first authority to determine and decide all questions of non-arbitrability. The court has been
conferred power of “second look” on aspects of non- arbitrability post the award in terms of
sub-clauses (i), (ii) or (iv) of Section 34(2)(a) or sub-clause (i) of Section 34(2)(b) of the Arbitration
Act.
154.4. Rarely as a demurrer the court may interfere at Section 8 or 11 stage when it is manifestly and
ex facie certain that the arbitration agreement is non-existent, invalid or the disputes are
non-arbitrable, though the nature and facet of non-arbitrability would, to some extent, determine
the level and nature of judicial scrutiny. The restricted and limited review is to check and protect
parties from being forced to arbitrate when the matter is demonstrably “non-arbitrable” and to cut
off the deadwood. The court by default would refer the matter when contentions relating to
non-arbitrability are plainly arguable; when consideration in summary proceedings would be
insufficient and inconclusive; when facts are contested; when the party opposing arbitration adopts
delaying tactics or impairs conduct of arbitration proceedings. This is not the stage for the court to
enter into a mini trial or elaborate review so as to usurp the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal but
to affirm and uphold integrity and efficacy of arbitration as an alternative dispute resolution
mechanism.” (emphasis supplied)
23. The limited scope of judicial scrutiny at the pre-referral stage is navigated through the test of a
‘prima facie review’. This is explained as under:
“133. Prima facie case in the context of Section 8 is not to be confused with the merits
of the case put up by the parties which has to be established before the Arbitral
Tribunal. It is restricted to the subject-matter of the suit being prima facie arbitrable
under a valid arbitration agreement. Prima facie case means that the assertions on
these aspects are bona fide. When read with the principles of separation and
competence-competence and Section 34 of the Arbitration Act, the referral court
without getting bogged down would compel the parties to abide unless there are good
and substantial reasons to the contrary.
134. Prima facie examination is not full review but a primary first review to weed out
manifestly and ex facie non-existent and invalid arbitration agreements and non-
arbitrable disputes. The prima facie review at the reference stage is to cut the
deadwood and trim off the side branches in straightforward cases where dismissal is
barefaced and pellucid and when on the facts and law the litigation must stop at the
first stage. Only when the court is certain that no valid arbitration agreement exists
or the disputes/subject-matter are not arbitrable, the application under Section 8
would be rejected. At this stage, the court should not get lost in thickets and decide
debatable questions of facts. Referral proceedings are preliminary and summary and
not a mini trial… … 138…On the other hand, issues relating to contract formation,
existence, validity and non-arbitrability would be connected and intertwined with the
issues underlying the merits of the respective disputes/claims. They would be factual
and disputed and for the Arbitral Tribunal to decide.
Ntpc Ltd. vs M/S Spml Infra Ltd. on 10 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197054318/
8
139. We would not like to be too prescriptive, albeit observe that the court may for legitimate
reasons, to prevent wastage of public and private resources, can exercise judicial discretion to
conduct an intense yet summary prima facie review while remaining conscious that it is to assist the
arbitration procedure and not usurp jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal. Undertaking a detailed full
review or a long-drawn review at the referral stage would obstruct and cause delay undermining the
integrity and efficacy of arbitration as a dispute resolution mechanism. Conversely, if the court
becomes too reluctant to intervene, it may undermine effectiveness of both the arbitration and the
court. There are certain cases where the prima facie examination may require a deeper
consideration. The court’s challenge is to find the right amount of and the context when it would
examine the prima facie case or exercise restraint. The legal order needs a right balance between
avoiding arbitration obstructing tactics at referral stage and protecting parties from being forced to
arbitrate when the matter is clearly non-arbitrable.
140. Accordingly, when it appears that prima facie review would be inconclusive, or on
consideration inadequate as it requires detailed examination, the matter should be left for final
determination by the Arbitral Tribunal selected by the parties by consent. The underlying rationale
being not to delay or defer and to discourage parties from using referral proceeding as a ruse to
delay and obstruct. In such cases a full review by the courts at this stage would encroach on the
jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal and violate the legislative scheme allocating jurisdiction
between the courts and the Arbitral Tribunal. Centralisation of litigation with the Arbitral Tribunal
as the primary and first adjudicator is beneficent as it helps in quicker and efficient resolution of
disputes.” (emphasis supplied)
24. Following the general rule and the principle laid down in Vidya Drolia (supra), this Court has
consistently been holding that the arbitral tribunal is the preferred first authority to determine and
decide all questions of non-arbitrability. In Pravin Electricals Pvt. Ltd. v. Galaxy Infra and Engg. Pvt.
Ltd.19, Sanjiv Prakash v. Seema Kukreja and Ors.20, and Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. v. NCC Ltd.,21
19 (2021) 5 SCC 671, paras 29, 30.
20 (2021) 9 SCC 732.
21 (2022) SCC OnLine SC 896.
the parties were referred to arbitration, as the prima facie review in each of these cases on the
objection of non-arbitrability was found to be inconclusive. Following the exception to the general
principle that the court may not refer parties to arbitration when it is clear that the case is
manifestly and ex facie non-arbitrable, in BSNL and Anr. v. Nortel Networks India (P) Ltd.22 and
Secunderabad Cantonment Board v. B. Ramachandraiah & Sons23, arbitration was refused as the
claims of the parties were demonstrably time-barred.
25. Eye of the Needle: The above-referred precedents crystallise the position of law that the
pre-referral jurisdiction of the courts under Section 11(6) of the Act is very narrow and inheres two
inquiries. The primary inquiry is about the existence and the validity of an arbitration agreement,
which also includes an inquiry as to the parties to the agreement and the applicant’s privity to the
Ntpc Ltd. vs M/S Spml Infra Ltd. on 10 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197054318/
9
said agreement. These are matters which require a thorough examination by the referral court. The
secondary inquiry that may arise at the reference stage itself is with respect to the non- arbitrability
of the dispute.
22 (2021) 5 SCC 738. (hereinafter ‘Nortel Networks’) 23 (2021) 5 SCC 705.
26. As a general rule and a principle, the arbitral tribunal is the preferred first authority to
determine and decide all questions of non-arbitrability. As an exception to the rule, and rarely as a
demurrer, the referral court may reject claims which are manifestly and ex-facie non-arbitrable24.
Explaining this position, flowing from the principles laid down in Vidya Drolia (supra), this Court in
a subsequent decision in Nortel Networks (supra) held25:
“45.1 ...While exercising jurisdiction under Section 11 as the judicial forum, the court
may exercise the prima facie test to screen and knockdown ex facie meritless,
frivolous, and dishonest litigation. Limited jurisdiction of the courts would ensure
expeditious and efficient disposal at the referral stage. At the referral stage, the Court
can interfere “only” when it is “manifest” that the claims are ex facie time-barred and
dead, or there is no subsisting dispute...”
27. The standard of scrutiny to examine the non-arbitrability of a claim is only prima facie. Referral
courts must not undertake a full review of the contested facts; they must only be confined to a
primary first review26 and let facts speak for themselves. This also requires the courts to examine
whether the assertion on arbitrability is bona fide or not.27 The prima facie scrutiny of the facts
must lead to a clear conclusion that there is not even a vestige 24 Vidya Drolia supra note 7, para
154.4.
25 Nortel Networks supra note 22, para 45.1.
26 Vidya Drolia supra note 7, para 134.
27 ibid.
of doubt that the claim is non-arbitrable.28 On the other hand, even if there is the slightest doubt,
the rule is to refer the dispute to arbitration29.
28. The limited scrutiny, through the eye of the needle, is necessary and compelling. It is
intertwined with the duty of the referral court to protect the parties from being forced to arbitrate
when the matter is demonstrably non-arbitrable30. It has been termed as a legitimate interference
by courts to refuse reference in order to prevent wastage of public and private resources31. Further,
as noted in Vidya Drolia (supra), if this duty within the limited compass is not exercised, and the
Court becomes too reluctant to intervene, it may undermine the effectiveness of both, arbitration
and the Court32. Therefore, this Court or a High Court, as the case may be, while exercising
jurisdiction under Section 11(6) of the Act, is not expected to act mechanically merely to deliver a
purported dispute raised by an applicant at the doors of the chosen 28 Nortel Networks supra note
Ntpc Ltd. vs M/S Spml Infra Ltd. on 10 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197054318/
10
22, para 47.
29 Vidya Drolia supra note 7, para 154.4.
30 ibid para 154.4.
31 ibid para 139.
32 ibid.
arbitrator33, as explained in DLF Home Developers Limited v. Rajapura Homes Pvt. Ltd.
29. Analysis: We will now proceed to apply these principles to the present case and examine the
arbitrability of the dispute by undertaking a prima facie review of the basic facts.
30. SPML duly completed the stipulated work under the subject contract, and a Completion
Certificate was issued by NTPC on 27.03.2019. SPML sought the release of the final payment, and
NTPC, by its letter dated 10.04.2019, agreed to release the same.
31. A No-Demand Certificate was issued by SPML on 12.04.2019, and the final payment was
released by April 2019. There is nothing on record about any pending claims of SPML during the
subsistence of the contract or till the release of the final payment. This is evident from the Writ
Petition as well as the Arbitration Petition under Section 11 of the Act.
32. While NTPC released the final payment, on 14.05.2019, it justified the withholding of SPML’s
Bank Guarantees on the 33 DLF Home Developers Limited v. Rajapura Homes Pvt. Ltd 2021 SCC
OnLine SC 781, paras 18, 20.
ground that there are certain disputes between the parties with respect to other projects.
33. Objecting to the stand of NTPC by its letter dated 15.05.2019, SPML stated that linking the Bank
Guarantees with claims under other projects was unjustified. In turn, SPML raised a claim of Rs.
72,01,53,899/- against NTPC. At the same time, SPML also sought the appointment of an
“Adjudicator” to settle these claims.
34. It is in the above-referred context that SPML filed the Writ Petition before the High Court on
03.07.2019. The prayer in the Writ Petition, particularly in the context of the huge claim raised on
15.05.2019, assumes importance. The prayer is reproduced herein below for ready reference:
“(a) Pass an appropriate Writ, Order or Direction quashing the e-mail dated
14.05.2019 issued by the Respondent insofar as it pertains to the release of the Bank
Guarantees being (a)0040ILG002609, (b) 0040ILG001109, (c)0040ILG001209, (d)
0040ILG001309 and direct the Respondent to release the aforesaid Bank Guarantees
forthwith, ...”
Ntpc Ltd. vs M/S Spml Infra Ltd. on 10 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197054318/
11
35. There is no reference to the claim of Rs.72,01,53,899/- in the body or the Prayer of the Writ
Petition. Conspicuously, the Writ Petition is confined to seeking a direction to return the Bank
Guarantees.
36. Pending disposal of the Writ Petition, the High Court, by an interim order dated 08.07.2019,
directed NPTC not to invoke the Bank Guarantees. The interim order was subject to SPML keeping
the Bank Guarantees alive. The relevant portions of the order are:
“…
2. Issue notice. The learned counsel appearing for the respondent accepts notice.
3. Admittedly, the contract pursuant to which the bank guarantees in question had
been furnished has been completed and there is no dispute that the petitioner’s
performance of the contract was satisfactory. The petitioner also claims that it has
received the entire consideration for the same. The petitioner’s claims that the release
of the bank guarantees is being withheld contrary to the terms of the contract
between the parties, in order to pressurize the petitioner in respect of certain disputes
in relation to other contracts, which are pending adjudication before the Arbitral
Tribunal.
…
6. In the meanwhile, the respondents are restrained from invoking the bank
guarantees, subject to the petitioner keeping the same alive.”
37. On 23.07.2019, SPML sent a Notice to NTPC, intimating its intention to invoke Arbitration
under the Dispute Resolution Clause.
38. During the pendency of the Writ Petition, the parties engaged themselves in multiple
discussions about their claims and counter-claims. All that culminated in the Settlement Agreement
dated 27.05.2020. The Terms of the Settlement Agreement are as follows:
“NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the premises and mutual promises contained herein, the
parties agree as follows:
1. That the Agency undertakes to withdraw WP No. 7213/2019 filed in the Hon’ble High Court upon
execution of the present agreement immediately upon receipt of original Bank Guarantees stated
herein below lying with NTPC as mentioned herein below at Para 4.
2. That the Agency has agreed not to initiate any further proceedings in relation with the present
contract agreement and work executed by the Agency, of any nature whatsoever. Further, the
Agency has undertaken not to raise any claim of any nature whatsoever against the NTPC Ltd. in
relation with the present contract agreement and work executed by the Agency, be it Arbitration
Ntpc Ltd. vs M/S Spml Infra Ltd. on 10 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197054318/
12
proceedings, civil suit, writ petition, or any other proceedings before any judicial or quasi-judicial
forum.
3. That the Agency has confirmed it has received entire payments arising out of the present contract
and the same stands closed, and no further sum/money is payable to the Agency in any manner
whatsoever by NTPC Ltd. under the subject contract.
…
5. That NTPC Ltd. has further agreed not to raise any contempt proceedings against the Agency for
not keeping alive the BGs as directed by the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi in pending Writ Petition.”
39. In compliance with the Settlement Agreement, NTPC released the Bank Guarantees on
30.06.2020, which were the subject matter of the pending Writ Petition.
40. It is noteworthy that the Bank Guarantees expired on 19.11.2019 and 16.12.2019, despite the
specific direction by the High Court to SPML to keep its Bank Guarantees alive. However, in
compliance with its express undertaking in the Settlement Agreement, NTPC did not file any
contempt proceedings against SPML.
41. Following the release of the Bank Guarantees as per the Settlement Agreement, SPML withdrew
the Writ Petition, as recorded by the High Court in its Order dated 21.09.2020.
42. One month later, on 10.10.2020, SPML filed the Arbitration Petition under Section 11(6) of the
Act alleging coercion and economic duress in the execution of the Settlement Agreement. It was also
alleged that the Settlement Agreement was repudiated on 22.07.2020 through SPML’s letter to
NTPC, disputing the Settlement Agreement.
43. In its reply to the Arbitration Petition, NTPC specifically pointed out that SPML never raised any
claims with respect to the dues amounting to Rs. 72,01,53,899/- during the pendency of the
contract, and that the allegations of coercion and economic duress are completely false. NTPC
alleged that the Arbitration Petition lacked bona fide.
44. A simple narration of the bare facts, as indicated above, leads us to conclude that the allegations
of coercion and economic duress are not bona fide, and that there were no pending claims between
the parties for submission to arbitration. The Respondent’s claim fits in the description of an
attempt to initiate “ex facie meritless, frivolous and dishonest litigation”34. We will endeavor to give
reasons for our conclusion.
45. The whole dispute revolves around the solitary act of the Appellant, NTPC, in not returning the
Bank Guarantees despite the successful completion of work. This continued even after SPML issued
the No-Demand Certificate and NTPC released the final payment. These undisputed facts led to the
institution of the Writ Petition before the Delhi High Court. There were no allegations of coercion or
economic duress compelling SPML to withdraw any pending claims under the subject contract as a
Ntpc Ltd. vs M/S Spml Infra Ltd. on 10 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197054318/
13
condition for the return of the Bank Guarantees. On the contrary, the only allegation by SPML was
with respect to NTPC’s “illegal” action of interlinking the release of the Bank Guarantees with some
other contracts. This was precisely the argument before the High Court, and, in fact, this submission
is recorded by the High Court while issuing notice and injuncting NTPC. This fact clearly indicates
that 34 Vidya Drolia supra note 7, para 147.11.
the plea of coercion and economic duress leading to the Settlement Agreement is an afterthought.
46. We will now examine whether the allegations of coercion and economic duress in the execution
of the Settlement Agreement are bona fide or not. This inquiry has a direct bearing on the
arbitrability of the dispute. It was during the subsistence of the Writ Petition and the High Court’s
interim order, when SPML had complete protection of the Court, that the parties entered into the
Settlement Agreement. This agreement was comprehensive. It inter alia provided for (i) the release
of Bank Guarantees by NTPC, (ii) the withdrawal of SPML’s Writ Petition, (iii) restraining NTPC
from filing contempt proceedings against SPML for letting the Bank Guarantees expire, and finally,
(iv) restraining SPML from initiating any proceedings under the subject contract, including
arbitration. The Settlement Agreement also recorded that there were no subsisting issues pending
between the parties.
47. The plea of coercion and economic duress must be seen in the context of the execution of the
Settlement Agreement not being disputed, and its implementation leading to the release of the Bank
Guarantees on 30.06.2020 also not being disputed. Almost three weeks after the release of the Bank
Guarantees, a letter of repudiation was issued by SPML on 22.07.2020. This letter was issued about
two months after the Settlement Agreement was executed and in fact during the subsistence of the
Writ Petition. After reaping the benefits of the Settlement Agreement, the Writ Petition was
withdrawn on 21.09.2020. It is thereafter that the present application under Section 11(6) of the Act
was filed. The sequence of events leads us to conclude that the letter of repudiation was issued only
to wriggle out of the terms of the Settlement Agreement.
48. The foregoing clarifies beyond doubt that the claims sought to be submitted to arbitration were
raised as an afterthought. Further, SPML’s allegations of coercion and economic duress in the
execution of the Settlement Agreement lack bona fide. They are liable to be knocked down as ex facie
frivolous and untenable.
49. In view of the above-referred facts, which speak for themselves, we are of the opinion that this is
a case where the High Court should have exercised the prima facie test to screen and strike down the
ex-facie meritless and dishonest litigation. These are the kinds of cases where the High Court should
exercise the restricted and limited review to check and protect parties from being forced to arbitrate.
50. Accordingly, we have no hesitation in holding that the High Court has committed an error in
allowing the application under Section 11(6) of the Act. High Court ought to have examined the issue
of the final settlement of disputes in the context of the principles laid down in Vidya Drolia (supra).
Ntpc Ltd. vs M/S Spml Infra Ltd. on 10 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197054318/
14
51. For the reasons stated above, the decision of the High Court of Delhi in Arbitration Petition No.
477 of 2020, dated 08.04.2021, is set aside, and Civil Appeal No. 4778 of 2022 stands allowed.
52. The parties shall bear their own costs.
....................................CJI. [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] ........................................J.
[Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha] New Delhi;
April 10, 2023
Ntpc Ltd. vs M/S Spml Infra Ltd. on 10 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197054318/
15
