Supreme Court of India
Adivasis For Social And Human ... vs Union Of India on 10 May, 2023
Author: Abhay S. Oka
Bench: Abhay S. Oka, Rajesh Bindal
                                                                          REPORTABLE
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2202 OF 2012
                         Adivasis for Social and
Human Rights Action                                …Appellant
                                                     versus
                         Union of India & Ors.                           ...Respondents
                                             J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1. In exercise of powers under sub−clause (2) of Clause 6 of the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution of
India, on 31 st December 1977, the Hon’ble President of India declared the entire District of
Sundargarh in the State of Orissa as a Signature Not Verified Digitally signed by Scheduled Area (for
short, ‘the Scheduled Area’). The Indu Marwah Date: 2023.05.10 18:50:26 IST Reason: appellant, a
society registered under the Societies Civil Appeal No.2202 of 2012 Registration Act, 1860, invoked
the writ jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. The first
contention raised in the writ petition was that in the Scheduled Area, except for the members of the
Scheduled Tribes, no one has the right to settle down. A contention was raised in the writ petition
that every person, who does not belong to Scheduled Tribe and residing in the Scheduled Area, is an
unlawful occupant and, therefore, is disentitled to exercise his right to vote in any constituency in
the Scheduled Area. Further contention raised was that every constituency in the Scheduled Area
should be declared as a reserved constituency under Articles 330 and 332 of the Constitution of
India. It was also contended that no candidate, other than the candidates belonging to the
Scheduled Tribes, should have the right to contest the elections of the Legislative Assembly or the
Lok Sabha in the Scheduled Area.
2. Another contention raised in the petition is that in view of sub−clause (1) of Clause 5 of the Fifth
Schedule unless there is a specific notification issued by the Hon’ble Governor of the State applying
any particular Central or State law to a Scheduled Area, none of the provisions of the Central or
Adivasis For Social And Human ... vs Union Of India on 10 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27931323/
1
State laws are applicable to that particular Civil Appeal No.2202 of 2012 Scheduled Area. Therefore,
it was urged that the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (for short, ‘the 1950 Act’) and the
Delimitation Act, 2002 (for short, ‘the 2002 Act’) are not applicable to the Scheduled Area in the
absence of any such notification. A Division Bench of the High Court of Orissa, by the impugned
judgment, dismissed the writ petition. Being aggrieved by the decision of the High Court of Orissa,
the present appeal has been preferred pursuant to the grant of leave by this Court vide order dated
14th February 2012.
SUBMISSIONS
3. The first contention raised by the learned counsel appearing for the appellant is that none of the
laws enacted by the Central or the State Legislature are applicable to a Scheduled Area unless there
is a specific notification issued under sub−clause (1) of Clause 5 of the Fifth Schedule by the Hon’ble
Governor declaring that any particular law will be applicable to the Scheduled Area. He submitted
that Article 244(1) provides that the provisions of the Fifth Schedule shall apply to the
administration and control of the Scheduled Areas. Therefore, what is provided in Fifth Schedule
shall be considered as a law made by the Constitution of India. His submission is that no law made
Civil Appeal No.2202 of 2012 by the Central or the State Legislature can be applied to a Scheduled
Area in the absence of a specific notification issued by the Hon’ble Governor, and therefore, such
law shall be treated as null and void. He submitted that only the laws made under the Constitution
of India in exercise of power under the Fifth Schedule will apply to the Scheduled Areas. He
submitted that any law made by the State or the Central Legislature in its application to the
Scheduled Area will be in derogation of the provisions of Article 244 of the Constitution of India and
therefore, such laws are void.
4. He submitted that the Hon’ble Governor of the State must first decide which Acts of the
Parliament or the State Legislature should apply to Scheduled Areas of the State. After satisfying
himself that a particular enactment needs to be applied to a particular Scheduled Area, he must
issue a notification making applicable the law to the Scheduled Area. He submitted that unless a
specific notification is issued by the Hon’ble Governor clearly incorporating the title and other
particulars of every Act of the Parliament and the State Legislature, which will be applied to the
Scheduled Area, no Act of Parliament or State Legislature is applicable to a Scheduled Area.
Civil Appeal No.2202 of 2012
5. Inviting our attention to the Fundamental Rights guaranteed under sub−clause (e) of Clause (1) of
Article 19 of the Constitution of India, he submitted that what prevails in the Scheduled Areas is the
law made in accordance with Clause 5 of the Fifth Schedule.
6. The learned counsel relied upon the decisions of the Federal Court in the case of Raja Bahadur
Kamakshya Narain Singh of Ramgarh v. Commissioner of Income Tax Bihar1 and in the case of
Chatturam v. Commissioner of Income Tax2 in support of the interpretation made by him of sub−
clause (1) of Clause 5 of the Fifth Schedule. In the statement of case, the appellant has submitted
that as the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 is not notified by the Hon’ble Governor, the said law is not
Adivasis For Social And Human ... vs Union Of India on 10 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27931323/
2
applicable to the Scheduled Area. We have also heard the learned counsel appearing for the
respondents.
OUR VIEW
7. The first question to be answered by this Court is whether the Central and the State Acts can apply
to a Scheduled Area unless a specific notification making the said Acts applicable to the Scheduled
Area is issued by the 1 (1947) Federal Court Reports 130 2 AIR 1947 FC 32 Civil Appeal No.2202 of
2012 Hon’ble Governor. Clause 5 of the Fifth Schedule reads thus:
“5. Law applicable to Scheduled Areas. — (1) Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution, the Governor may by public notification direct that any particular Act of
Parliament or of the Legislature of the State shall not apply to a Scheduled Area or
any part thereof in the State or shall apply to a Scheduled Area or any part thereof in
the State subject to such exceptions and modifications as he may specify in the
notification and any direction given under this sub−paragraph may be given so as to
have retrospective effect.
(2) The Governor may make regulations for the peace and good government of any
area in a State which is for the time being a Scheduled Area.
In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may—
(a) prohibit or restrict the transfer of land by or among members of the Scheduled
Tribes in such area;
(b) regulate the allotment of land to members of the Scheduled Tribes in such area;
Civil Appeal No.2202 of 2012
(c) regulate the carrying on of business as money−lender by persons who lend money to members of
the Scheduled Tribes in such area.
(3) In making any such regulation as is referred to in sub−paragraph (2) of this paragraph, the
Governor may repeal or amend any Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State or any
existing law which is for the time being applicable to the area in question.
(4) All regulations made under this paragraph shall be submitted forthwith to the President and,
until assented to by him, shall have no effect.
(5) No regulation shall be made under this paragraph unless the Governor making the regulation
has, in the case where there is a Tribes Advisory Council for the State, consulted such Council.”
(emphasis added)
Adivasis For Social And Human ... vs Union Of India on 10 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27931323/
3
8. On a plain reading of sub−clause (1) of Clause 5 of the Fifth Schedule, the power of the Hon’ble
Governor under the said sub−clause (1) extends to:
i. directing by a notification that a particular Central or State legislation will not apply
to a Scheduled Area in the State, and;
Civil Appeal No.2202 of 2012 ii. directing by a notification that a particular State or Central Act will
apply to a Scheduled Area subject to certain modifications.
The first part of sub−clause (1) proceeds on the footing that all the State and Central legislations
applicable to a State are applicable to the Scheduled Areas within the said State. Otherwise, there
was no reason to confer a power on the Hon’ble Governor to declare that particular legislation will
not apply to a particular Scheduled Area.
9. For interpreting Clause 5, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant has relied upon the
decisions of the Federal Court in the cases of Raja Bahadur1 and Chhaturam2. Both the decisions
deal with Section 92 of the Government of India Act, 1935, which reads thus:
“Administration of Excluded Areas and Partially Excluded Areas:
92. (1) The executive authority of a Province extends to excluded and partially excluded areas
therein, but, notwithstanding anything in this Act, no Act of the Federal Legislature or of the
Provincial Legislature, shall apply to an excluded area or a partially excluded area, unless the
Governor by public Civil Appeal No.2202 of 2012 notification so directs, and the Governor in giving
such a direction with respect to any Act may direct that the Act shall in its application to the area, or
to any specified part thereof, have effect subject to such exceptions or modifications as he thinks fit.
(2) The Governor may make regulations for the peace and good Government of any area in a
Province which is for the time being an excluded area, or a partially excluded area, and any
regulations so made may repeal or amend any Act of the Federal Legislature or of the Provincial
Legislature, or any existing Indian law, which is for the time being applicable to the area in question.
Regulations made under this sub−section shall be submitted forthwith to the Governor−General and
until assented to by him in his discretion shall have no effect, and the provisions of this Part of this
Act with respect to the power of His Majesty to disallow Acts shall apply in relation to any such
regulations assented to by the Governor−General as they apply in relation to Acts of a Provincial
Legislature assented to by him.
(3) The Governor shall, as respects any area in a Province which is for the time Civil Appeal No.2202
of 2012 being, an excluded area, exercise his functions in his discretion.” (emphasis added)
10. By virtue of Article 395, the Government of India Act, 1935 has been repealed. Sub−Section (1) of
Section 92 of the Government of India Act, 1935 and sub−clause (1) of Clause 5 of the Fifth Schedule
are completely different. Sub−Section (1) of Section 92 provides that no Act of the Federal
Adivasis For Social And Human ... vs Union Of India on 10 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27931323/
4
Legislature or a Provincial Legislature shall apply to an Excluded Area unless the Governor by a
public notification so directs. However, sub−Clause (1) of Clause 5 of the Fifth Schedule confers a
power on the Hon’ble Governor to issue a notification for directing that a particular enactment,
either State or Central, will not apply to a Scheduled Area. He also has the power to direct that a
particular enactment will apply to a Scheduled Area with modifications as may be specified by him
in the notification. Sub−clause (1) of Clause 5 of the Fifth Schedule proceeds on the basis that all the
State and the Central laws which are otherwise applicable to a State apply to Scheduled Areas in the
State. Whereas, sub−Section (1) of Section 92 of the Government of India Act, 1935 provides that no
law of Federal or Provincial Legislature will apply to an Excluded Civil Appeal No.2202 of 2012 Area
unless a notification is issued by the Hon’ble Governor issuing a specific direction to that effect.
Thus, the reliance placed on sub−Section (1) of Section 92 of the Government of India Act, 1935 is
not at all relevant.
11. The contention raised by the appellant that unless there is a specific notification issued by the
Hon’ble Governor applying Central or State laws to a Scheduled Area, the said laws will not apply to
the said Scheduled Area, to say the least, is preposterous. In fact, the issue is no longer res integra.
There is a binding decision of the Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of Chebrolu Leela
Prasad Rao & Ors. v. State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors3. In paragraph 2 of the said decision, the
Constitution Bench formulated the questions which required consideration. Paragraph 2 of the said
decision reads thus:
“2. Several questions have been referred for consideration in the order dated 11−1−
2016 [Chebrolu Leela Prasad Rao v. State of A.P., (2021) 11 SCC 526]. We have
renumbered Questions 1(a), (b), (c) and (d) based on interconnection. The questions
are as follows: (Chebrolu Leela Prasad Rao case [Chebrolu Leela Prasad Rao v. State
of 3 (2021) 11 SCC 401 Civil Appeal No.2202 of 2012 A.P., (2021) 11 SCC 526], SCC p.
527, para
1) (1) What is the scope of Para 5(1), Schedule V to the Constitution of India?
(a) Does the provision empower the Governor to make a new law?
(b) Does the power extend to subordinate legislation?
(c) Can the exercise of the power conferred therein override fundamental rights
guaranteed under Part III?
(d) Does the exercise of such power override any parallel exercise of power by the
President under Article 371−D?
(2) Whether 100% reservation is permissible under the Constitution? (3) Whether
the notification merely contemplates a classification under Article 16(1) and not
reservation under Article 16(4)?
Adivasis For Social And Human ... vs Union Of India on 10 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27931323/
5
(4) Whether the conditions of eligibility (i.e.
origin and cut−off date) to avail the benefit of reservation in the notification are reasonable?”
(emphasis added) In paragraph 39.1, the Constitution Bench held thus:
“39. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
Civil Appeal No.2202 of 2012 39.1. Para 5(1) of Schedule V does not confer upon Governor power to
enact a law but to direct that a particular Act of Parliament or the State Legislature shall not apply to
a Scheduled Area or any part thereof or shall apply with exceptions and modifications, as may be
specified in the notification. The Governor is not authorised to enact a new Act under the provisions
contained in Para 5(1) of Schedule V to the Constitution. Area reserved for the Governor under the
provisions of Para 5(1) is prescribed. He cannot act beyond its purview and has to exercise power
within the four corners of the provisions.
39.2. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..” (emphasis added) In paragraph 40, the Constitution Bench
proceeded to hold thus:
“40. The Act of Parliament or the appropriate legislature applies to the Scheduled
Areas. The Governor has the power to exclude their operation by a notification. In the
absence thereof, the Acts of the legislature shall extend to such areas. In Jatindra v.
Province of Bihar [Jatindra v. Province of Bihar, 1949 SCC OnLine FC 23 : ILR (1949)
28 Pat 703 : 1949 FLJ 225] , it was held that the power of the Governor under Para 5
is a Civil Appeal No.2202 of 2012 legislative power and the Governor is empowered
to change or modify the provisions of the Act or the section as he deems fit by way of
issuing a notification. The power under Para 5(1) is limited to the application of the
Governor's decision to apply an Act or making modification or creating exceptions.
Though the power is legislative to some extent, that is confined to applicability,
modification, or creating exceptions concerning the Act of Parliament or the State.
While Para 5(2) confers the power of independent legislation, the Governor has
plenary power of framing regulations for the peace and good governance of a
Scheduled Area. He is the repository of faith to decide as to the necessity. The
Governor is empowered by Para 5(3) to repeal or amend any Act of Parliament or
State Legislature, following the procedure prescribed therein, in exercise of making
regulations as provided under Para 5(2) of Schedule V. The aspect of power was
considered in Ram Kirpal Bhagat v. State of Bihar [Ram Kirpal Bhagat v. State of
Bihar, (1969) 3 SCC 471 : 1970 SCC (Cri) 154] thus : (SCC pp. 478−80, paras 21−23)
“21. The second question which falls for consideration is whether the Bihar
Regulation I of 1951 is in excess of the Governor's powers. The contentions were:
first, that the Regulation I of 1951 could not at all have been made; secondly, that Civil Appeal
No.2202 of 2012 Regulations deal with the subject−matter and did not mean power to apply law and
thirdly, the power to extend a law passed by another legislature was said to be not a legislative
function, but was a conditional legislature. The legislation, in the present case, is in relation to what
Adivasis For Social And Human ... vs Union Of India on 10 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27931323/
6
is described as Scheduled Areas. The Scheduled Areas are dealt with by Article 244 of the
Constitution and the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution. Prior to the Constitution, the excluded areas
were dealt with by Sections 91 and 92 of the Government of India Act, 1935. The excluded and the
partially excluded areas were areas so declared by Order in Council under Section 91 and under
Section 92. No act of the Federal Legislature or of the Provincial Legislature was to apply to an
excluded or a partially excluded area unless the Governor by public notification so directed. Sub−
section (2) of Section 92 of the Government of India Act, 1935 conferred power on the Governor to
make regulations for the peace and good government of any area in a Province which was an
excluded or a partially excluded area and any regulations so made might repeal or amend any Act of
the Federal Legislature or the Provincial Legislature or any existing Indian law which was for the
time being applicable to the area in question. The extent of the Civil Appeal No.2202 of 2012
legislative power of the Governor under Section 92 of the Government of India Act, 1935 in making
regulations for the peace and good government of any area conferred on the Governor in the words
of Lord Halsbury “an utmost discretion of enactment for the attainment of the objects pointed to.”
(See Riel v. R. [Riel v. R., (1885) LR 10 AC 675 (PC)], AC p. 678.) In that case the words which fell
for consideration by the Judicial Committee were “the power of Parliament of Canada to make
provisions for the administration, peace, order and good government of any territory not for the
time being included in any province”. It was contended that if any legislation differed from the
provisions which in England had been made for the administration, peace, order and good
government then the same could not be sustained as valid. That contention was not accepted. These
words were held to embrace the widest power to legislate for the peace and good government for the
area in question.”” (emphasis added) Again, in paragraph 52, the Constitution Bench answered
Question (1)(b) as under:
“52. We are of the opinion that the Governor's power to make new law is not available
in view of the clear language of Para 5(1), Fifth Schedule does not recognise or confer
such Civil Appeal No.2202 of 2012 power, but only power is not to apply the law or to
apply it with exceptions or modifications. Thus, the notification is ultra vires to Para
5(1) of Schedule V to the Constitution.” (emphasis added)
12. In paragraph 80, the Constitution Bench answered Question (1)(c). Paragraph 80 reads thus:
“80. The power is conferred on the Governor to deal with the Scheduled Areas. It is
not meant to prevail over the Constitution. The power of the Governor is pari passu
with the legislative power of Parliament and the State. The legislative power can be
exercised by Parliament or the State subject to the provisions of Part III of the
Constitution. In our considered opinion, the power of the Governor does not
supersede the fundamental rights under Part III of the Constitution. It has to be
exercised subject to Part III and other provisions of the Constitution. When Para 5 of
the Fifth Schedule confers power on the Governor, it is not meant to be conferral of
arbitrary power. The Constitution can never aim to confer any arbitrary power on the
constitutional authorities. They are to be exercised in a rational manner Civil Appeal
No.2202 of 2012 keeping in view the objectives of the Constitution. The powers are
not in derogation but the furtherance of the constitutional aims and objectives.”
Adivasis For Social And Human ... vs Union Of India on 10 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27931323/
7
(emphasis added)
13. Therefore, to conclude;
(i) All the Central and the State laws which are applicable to the entire State of Orissa
will continue to apply to the Scheduled Area unless, in exercise of powers under sub−
clause (1) of Clause 5 of the Fifth Schedule, there is a specific notification issued by
the Hon’ble Governor making a particular enactment inapplicable, either fully or
partially;
(ii) The power of the Hon’ble Governor under Clause 5 of the Fifth Schedule is
restricted to directing that a particular law will not apply to the Scheduled Area or it
will apply with such modifications as may be specified in the notification issued
under sub− clause (1) of Clause 5 of the Fifth Schedule or while making Regulations
in terms of sub−clause (2) of Clause 5 of the Fifth Schedule;
(iii) The power of the Hon’ble Governor under Clause 5 of the Fifth Schedule does not supersede the
Civil Appeal No.2202 of 2012 Fundamental Rights under Part III of the Constitution of India; and
(iv) Therefore, the Fundamental Rights conferred by sub−clause (e) of Article 19(1) of the
Constitution of India on the citizens can also be exercised in relation to the Scheduled Area.
14. Under sub−clause (e) of Clause (1) of Article 19 of the Constitution of India, every citizen has a
right to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India. However, by making a law, reasonable
restrictions can be put on the said Fundamental Right as provided in Clause (5) of Article
19. Therefore, we reject the argument that non−Tribals have no right to settle down in a Scheduled
Area.
15. The argument that the Fifth Schedule is a law made by the Parliament is misconceived. Even
assuming that Fifth Schedule is a law, it does not put any constraints on the exercise of the
Fundamental Rights under Article 19(1) of the Constitution of India.
16. Now, we come to the second question whether a non− Tribal has the right to vote in a Scheduled
Area. As far as the right to vote is concerned, the 1950 Act is applicable to Civil Appeal No.2202 of
2012 the Scheduled Area and therefore, the appellant cannot contend that only a person belonging
to Scheduled Tribe can cast a vote in elections of the constituencies in the Scheduled Area. The right
to vote will be governed by Part III of the 1950 Act. Every eligible voter is entitled to be registered in
the electoral roll of a constituency, in which he is ordinarily residing. Therefore, any person eligible
to vote who is ordinarily residing in the Scheduled Area has a right to vote, even if he is a non−
Tribal.
17. As regards providing reservation for all the Lok Sabha and the State Legislative constituencies in
a Scheduled Area, the appellant cannot contend that all the constituencies in a Scheduled area
Adivasis For Social And Human ... vs Union Of India on 10 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27931323/
8
should be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes. Reservation is required to be made in terms of Articles
330 and 332 of the Constitution of India. These provisions do not provide that all the constituencies
in the Scheduled Areas shall be reserved for Scheduled Tribes. Moreover, the 2002 Act is applicable
to the Scheduled Area. Therefore, even the said prayer to issue a writ of mandamus, as regards the
reservation for the Scheduled Tribes, deserves to be rejected.
Civil Appeal No.2202 of 2012
18. The Land Acquisition Act, 1894 was made applicable to the whole of India except the State of
Jammu and Kashmir. In the absence of the exercise of power by the Hon’ble Governor under sub−
clause (1) of Clause 5 of the Fifth Schedule, the said law was applicable to the Scheduled Area.
19. We are, therefore, of the view that there is absolutely no merit in the appeal, and the High Court
was right when it dismissed the writ petition filed by the appellant. Only in view of the claim that the
appellant is working for the welfare of the tribals that we refrain from saddling the appellant with
costs.
20. Hence, the appeal is dismissed with no order as to costs.
…..….……………J.
(Abhay S. Oka) …...………………J.
(Rajesh Bindal) New Delhi;
May 10, 2023.
Civil Appeal No.2202 of 2012
Adivasis For Social And Human ... vs Union Of India on 10 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27931323/
9
