Supreme Court of India
Captain Manjit Singh Virdi ... vs Hussain Mohammed Shattaf on 18 May, 2023
Author: Abhay S. Oka
Bench: Abhay S. Oka, Rajesh Bindal
                                                       Criminal Appeal No. 1399 of 2023
                                                      [REPORTABLE]
                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                           Criminal Appeal No. 1399 of 2023
          Captain Manjit Singh Virdi (Retd.)                   …Appellant(s)
                                         Versus
          Hussain Mohammed Shattaf & Ors.                      …Respondent(s)
                                    JUDGMENT
Rajesh Bindal, J.
1. The order dated 17.07.2013 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Revision
Application No. 135 of 2012 has been challenged by the appellant. By the aforesaid order, the High
Court has set aside the order dated 21.02.2012 passed by the court below vide which application
filed by the Respondent nos.1 and 2 for discharge, was dismissed.
2. The dispute arises out of an FIR No. 46 of 2006 registered at Lonawala City Police Station on
14.05.2006 for murder of Manmohan Singh Sukhdev Singh Virdi, a resident of Signature Not
Verified Digitally signed by SNEHA DAS Virdi’s Bungalow, Thombarewadi, Lonawala. His body was
Date: 2023.05.18 17:33:52 IST Reason:
found lying in a pool of blood in his bedroom. Criminal Appeal No. 1399 of 2023
3. Learned counsel appearing for the Appellant submitted that a bare perusal of the impugned order
passed by the High Court shows that a mini trial has been conducted merely by referring to some of
the statements recorded by the police during investigation, which were forming part of the
chargesheet. This was beyond the scope of jurisdiction of the Court at the time of consideration of
application for discharge. The Court had failed to consider the fact that there was Psychological
Evaluation including Psychological Evaluation including Psychological Profiling, Polygraph Testing
and Brain Electrical Oscillations Signature Profiling (BEOS) conducted on Respondent Nos. 1 and
four other aides of respondent no.1, which lead towards the accusation of Respondent Nos. 1 and 2
in the crime.
Captain Manjit Singh Virdi ... vs Hussain Mohammed Shattaf on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41862725/
1
4. In support of the arguments, learned counsel for the appellant has placed reliance upon the
judgment of this Court in the case of State of Maharashtra and Anr. v. Dr. Maroti S/o.Kashinath
Pimpalkar1.
5. On the other hand, learned counsel for Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 submitted that it is a case of
blind murder, hence, there was no eye-witness. There was no enmity of Respondent 1 (2023) 4 SCC
298 Criminal Appeal No. 1399 of 2023 Nos. 1 and 2 with the deceased. They were happily living in
the neighbourhood. A false story was built up by the prosecution for which there is no material to
support. He further submitted that Trial Court had failed to exercise jurisdiction vested in it to
discharge the respondent no. 1 and 2. They have been falsely implicated in the case. It would be
abuse of the process of the Court in case they are made to face trial. The relevant material collected
by the prosecution was considered by the High Court.
6. Though the order passed by the High Court as such has not been challenged by the State. The
learned counsel for the State having no explanation therefor sought to argue that the impugned
order cannot be legally sustained as at the stage of consideration of application for discharge,
appreciation of the evidence as such was not possible as the same could be only after the evidence is
recorded in the Court after trial. At the stage of framing of charge only prima facie case is to be seen.
7. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record and relevant papers.
8. After registration of FIR, investigation was conducted and statements of number of persons were
recorded under Criminal Appeal No. 1399 of 2023 Section 161 and 164 of Cr.P.C. Even a
Psychological Evaluation including Psychological Profiling, Polygraph Testing and Brain Electrical
Oscillations Signature Profiling (BEOS) of Respondent No. 1 was conducted on 31.5.2007 and
similar tests were conducted on the other four persons viz. Baliram Chidhu Khade, Mohan
Vijayamma Shridharan, Ashok Gajraj Chaudhary, Mehboob Dastagi Sheikh who were close aides of
respondent no.1.
9. As it was a blind murder, the crime was investigated and chargesheet dated 09.12.2009 was filed
against Hussain Mohammed Shattaf and Waheeda Hussain Shattaf (Respondent nos. 1 and 2) and
Zaanish Khan stating therein that while Respondent no.1 was staying in Dubai for the purpose of his
business, his wife respondent no.2 came in contact with the deceased and developed friendship.
They started meeting each other frequently. The friendship turned into physical relationship. When
the Respondent No.1 returned from Dubai, he came to know about the same. To take revenge, he in
connivance with respondent no.2 and one Zaanish Khan conspired to kill the deceased through
unknown assailants. Criminal Appeal No. 1399 of 2023
10. As the case was triable by Sessions, the matter was committed by the Magistrate to the Sessions
Court, Pune. Immediately thereafter Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 filed revision application for
discharge. The same was dismissed by the Trial Court vide Order dated 21.02.2012. The High Court
vide impugned order had set aside the order passed by the Trial Court and discharged Respondent
Nos. 1 and 2. The aforesaid order is under challenge before this Court.
Captain Manjit Singh Virdi ... vs Hussain Mohammed Shattaf on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41862725/
2
11. The law on issue as to what is to be considered at the time of discharge of an accused is well
settled. It is a case in which the Trial Court had not yet framed the charges. Immediately after filing
of chargesheet, application for discharge was filed. The settled proposition of law is that at the stage
of hearing on the charges entire evidence produced by the prosecution is to be believed. In case no
offence is made out then only an accused can be discharged. Truthfulness, sufficiency and
acceptability of the material produced can be done only at the stage of trial. At the stage of charge,
the Court has to satisfy that a prima facie case is made out against the accused persons. Interference
of the Court at that stage is required only if there is strong reasons to hold that in case the Criminal
Appeal No. 1399 of 2023 trial is allowed to proceed, the same would amount to abuse of process of
the Court.
12. The law on the point has been summarised in a recent judgment of this Court in State of
Rajasthan v. Ashok Kumar Kashyap2. Relevant paras are extracted below: -
“11.1. In P. Vijayan v. State of Kerala, (2010) 2 SCC 398, this Court had an occasion to
consider Section 227 CrPC What is required to be considered at the time of framing
of the charge and/or considering the discharge application has been considered
elaborately in the said decision. It is observed and held that at the stage of Section
227, the Judge has merely to sift the evidence in order to find out whether or not
there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. It is observed that in
other words, the sufficiency of grounds would take within its fold the nature of the
evidence recorded by the police or the documents produced before the court which ex
facie disclose that there are suspicious circumstances against the accused so as to
frame a charge against him. It is further observed that if the Judge comes to a
conclusion that there is sufficient ground to proceed, he will frame a charge under
Section 228 CrPC, if not, he will discharge the accused. It is further observed that
while exercising its judicial mind to the facts of the case in order to 2 (2021) 11 SCC
191 Criminal Appeal No. 1399 of 2023 determine whether a case for trial has been
made out by the prosecution, it is not necessary for the court to enter into the pros
and cons of the matter or into a weighing and balancing of evidence and probabilities
which is really the function of the court, after the trial starts.
11.2. In the recent decision of this Court in State of Karnataka v. M.R. Hiremath, (2019) 7 SCC 515,
one of us (D.Y. Chandrachud, J.) speaking for the Bench has observed and held in para 25 as under:
“25. The High Court [M.R.
Hiremath v. State, 2017 SCC OnLine Kar 4970] ought to have been cognizant of the fact that the trial
court was dealing with an application for discharge under the provisions of Section 239 CrPC. The
parameters which govern the exercise of this jurisdiction have found expression in several decisions
of this Court. It is a settled principle of law that at the stage of considering an application for
discharge the court must proceed on the assumption that the material which has been brought on
the record by the prosecution is true and evaluate the material in order to determine whether the
facts emerging from the material, taken on its face value, disclose the existence of the ingredients
Captain Manjit Singh Virdi ... vs Hussain Mohammed Shattaf on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41862725/
3
necessary to constitute the offence. In State of T.N. v. N. Suresh Rajan, (2014) 11 SCC 709, Criminal
Appeal No. 1399 of 2023 adverting to the earlier decisions on the subject, this Court held:
‘29. … At this stage, probative value of the materials has to be gone into and the court is not expected
to go deep into the matter and hold that the materials would not warrant a conviction. In our
opinion, what needs to be considered is whether there is a ground for presuming that the offence
has been committed and not whether a ground for convicting the accused has been made out. To put
it differently, if the court thinks that the accused might have committed the offence on the basis of
the materials on record on its probative value, it can frame the charge; though for conviction, the
court has to come to the conclusion that the accused has committed the offence. The law does not
permit a mini trial at this stage.”
13. The relevant part of the impugned order passed by the High Court is reproduced below:-
“In the statement of Suresh Thapa dated 11.12.2006, he says he had attended party at
the bungalow. In the statement of Collector Singh Thakur recorded on 9.12.2007, he
refers tearing of papers by accused no.2 at 7 O’ clock on 13.5.2006. Even this
statement Criminal Appeal No. 1399 of 2023 primarily would not activate to nail the
accused-
applicants as the incident of elimination/murder has taken place late in the night. Mr. Suresh
Thapa, in his statement on 14.5.2006, refers that in the late night he was sitting of a platform at site,
at such time a car came to drop deceased and thereafter the deceased went with his gardener Hari to
his house. In further statement dated 28.6.2006, he refers of a silver colour Tata India Car coming
to the area of society and a person from the car called the deceased loudly, he was tall with long hair.
The deceased came and had chat with the said person who later accompanied the deceased to
bungalow. In third statement dated 11.12.2006, Suresh Thapa changed his earlier version and stated
that a silver colour car came to the gate of the society and driver honked, the deceased came out of
his bungalow, he opened the door, the deceased closed the door and he then went towards bungalow
no.5 and while returning, the car was standing near his bungalow, the driver went ahead to the
deceased, however they had no communication. Then he went ahead and called “Captain Captain”,
they had chat. The person accompanied the deceased and 2 – 3 person were sitting in the car. In the
supplementary statement of Ramesh Dhakol – another security, dated 1.1.2007, he refers of vehicle
of accused no.2 coming back at around 2 to 2.30 a.m. in the night and she went to Criminal Appeal
No. 1399 of 2023 her bungalow. He says, his earlier statement was incorrect. Dr. Ajitsingh in his
statement dated 31.12.2006 refers to his visit to the deceased and also with the deceased to the
house of accused nos. 1 and 2 in April, 2006. He saw the deceased and accused no.2 on a swing
while accused no. 1 was nearby. This he noticed on 13.5.2006. The statement of Sajida Begum – wife
of Zarnish (Mohd. Asgar) does not implicate the accused-applicants. Brother of the deceased Mr.
Manjitsingh refers to a communication he had with accused no.1 in past, wherein accused no.1
allegedly conveyed him the deceased wanted to purchase everything, if time permits he will also
purchase his wife. This communication was on telephone”.
Captain Manjit Singh Virdi ... vs Hussain Mohammed Shattaf on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41862725/
4
14. A perusal of the impugned order passed by the High Court shows that some of the material
collected by the Investigating Agency filed alongwith chargesheet has been referred to in a sketchy
manner. The statements of Suresh Sherbahadur Thapa, Collector Thakur Singh, Ramesh Dhakol,
Manjit Singh, Dr. Ajit Singh and Sajida Begum have been referred to. However, from a perusal of the
record, it is evident that their statements have not be noticed either in their entirety or only part of
the statements recorded on a particular Criminal Appeal No. 1399 of 2023 day has been noticed and
the statements recorded either before or after, have not been referred to. Besides that, the
Investigating Agency had recorded the statements of Hiraman Dyaneshwar Chaudhari, Ramesh
Murlidhar, Mohan Vs., Ashok Gunaji Thosar, Mehboob Dastagi Sheikh, and Rakma Shivram
Waghmare, which have not been referred to and considered by the High Court while discharging
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2. The fact cannot lost sight of that it was a case of blind murder. The
circumstances only could have nailed the accused through the material collected by the Investigating
Agency.
15. Psychological Evaluation including Psychological Profiling, Polygraph Testing and BEOS of
Respondent No. 1 was conducted. Besides this test was also conducted of other four persons who
were close aides of respondent no.1, namely, Ahok Gajraj Chaudhary, Mehboob Dastagir Sheikh,
Baliram Chidhu Khade and Mohan Vijayamma Shridharan.
16. In the report of the test conducted on Respondent No.1, the opinion furnished by the Directorate
of Forensic Sciences Laboratory, Home Department, Maharashtra, shows the involvement of
Respondent No.1 in the murder of Captain Manmohan Singh. His psychological profiling also
pointed out Criminal Appeal No. 1399 of 2023 towards him being an antisocial personality with
tendency to go against the social norms. Relevant part of the report is extracted below:-
“Psychological Evaluation of the subject Mohammed Shattaf clearly indicates his
involvement in the murder of Capt. Manmohan Singh as indicated by Deception on
the questions of Polygraph and by Experiential Knowledge present on the significant
probes on BEOS. This finding was corroborated by the finding that the subject has
Antisocial Personality Traits and a tendency to portray himself in a socially desirable
way. Narcoanalysis could not be conducted on the subject he refused to give written
consent for the procedure”.
(emphasis supplied)
17. Besides this, opinion regarding four other persons shows that there was deceit in responding to
question about knowledge of killing of deceased. Relevant part of the report is extracted below:-
“Psychological Evaluation of the subjects Ashok Gajraj Chaudhary and Mehboob
Dastagi Sheikh included Psychological Profiling and Polygraph Examination in the
case of the murder of Capt.
Manmohan Singh. With regard to Ashok Gajraj Chaudary, even though he denied having any
Criminal Appeal No. 1399 of 2023 knowledge about the murder, yet his Polygraph examination
Captain Manjit Singh Virdi ... vs Hussain Mohammed Shattaf on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41862725/
5
revealed about the murder, yet his Polygraph examination revealed his attempts to deceive on
questions related to him hiding information related to the death of Capt. Singh him being asked by
somebody to hide information about this murder, and him knowing who has killed the victim. In
relation to Mehboob Dastagi Sheikh, even though he denied having witnessed or helped in the
murder of Capt. Manmohan Singh, or having any knowledge about the same, yet his Polygraph
Examination reveals ‘Deception’ on the question related to him knowing who has murdered Capt.
Manmohan Singh”.
(emphasis supplied)
18. The High Court vide impugned order had summed up the entire evidence in two paras without
even referring to the Psychological Evaluation including Psychological Profiling, Polygraph Testing
and Brain Electrical Oscillations Signature Profiling (BEOS) tests of the accused and the other aides
of respondent no.1 and ordered discharge of Respondent Nos.1 and 2.
19. Though Psychological Evaluation test report only may not be sufficient to convict an accused but
certainly a material Criminal Appeal No. 1399 of 2023 piece of evidence. Despite this material on
record, the High Court could not have opined that the case was not made out even for framing of
charge, for which only prima facie case is to be seen.
20. If the facts of the case are examined in the light of law laid down by this Court on the subject, it
is evident that the High Court has not even referred to the evidence collected by Investigating
Agency produced alongwith chargesheet in its entirety. Rather there is selective reference to the
statements of some of the persons recorded during investigation. It shows that there was total
non-application of mind. The High Court had exercised the jurisdiction in a manner which is not
vested in it to scuttle the trial of a heinous crime.
21. For the reasons mentioned above, the appeal is allowed and the impugned order of the High
Court is set aside.
_____________, J.
(Abhay S. Oka) ____________, J.
(Rajesh Bindal) New Delhi May 18, 2023.
//JK- PM //
Captain Manjit Singh Virdi ... vs Hussain Mohammed Shattaf on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41862725/
6
