Supreme Court of India
Damodhar (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Tejrao Bajirao Mhaske And Ors. on 4 May, 2023
Author: C.T. Ravikumar
Bench: M.R. Shah, C.T. Ravikumar
                                                                       Reportable
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                       Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023
                              (@ Special Leave Petition (C) No.10747 of 2016)
                         Damodhar Narayan Sawale (D) through LRs.
                                                           …Appellant (s)
                                            Versus
                         Shri Tejrao Bajirao Mhaske & Ors.
                                                                  …Respondent (s)
                                                       JUDGMENT
C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J.
1. This appeal filed under Article 136 of the Constitution of India is directed against the judgment
and final order dated 30.10.2015 in Second Appeal No.435 of 1995 passed by the High Court of
Judicature at Bombay, Nagpur Bench, whereby and whereunder the High Court reversed the
judgment and decree of the Signature Not Verified Court of Additional District Judge, Buldana, in
Regular Civil Appeal No.98 of 1987, reversing the judgment and Digitally signed by R Natarajan
Date: 2023.05.04 16:38:35 IST Reason:
Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 decree of dismissal passed by the Court of Joint Civil Judge, Junior
Division, Chikhli in Regular Civil Suit No.257 of 1985 (originally numbered as Regular Civil Suit
No.104 of 1979 on the file of the Court of Civil Judge, Senior Division, Buldana, before its transfer).
In short, as per the impugned judgment, the High Court restored the decree of dismissal of the suit
by the trial Court. The stated Regular Civil Suit is one for possession of suit land on the strength of
title.
2. Shorn of details, the plaint averments for seeking possession of the suit land, which is a field
comprised in Khasra No.20/2, having an extent of 3 Acres and 20 guntas in village Gangalgaon,
Taluk Chikhli, District Buldana, are as under: -
Original Defendant Nos.1 and 2 viz., Ramakrishna Ganpat Mhaske and Tejra Bajirao Mhaske, have
sold the above-described suit field in favour of the plaintiff as per registered sale deed dated
21.04.1979 (Exhibit-128). Soon on its execution the plaintiff was put in possession. On 25.04.1979,
the second defendant started disturbing his possession. Suit was then filed on 21.05.1979. In view of
the registered sale deed (Exhibit 128) he obtained absolute title over the suit land and in such
Damodhar (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Tejrao Bajirao Mhaske And Ors. on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4797588/
1
circumstances, the second defendant who sold the same Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 for
discharging debts and family needs got no right or reason to disturb his peaceful possession. The
total sale consideration of Rs.10,000/- was given to defendants for the aforesaid entire extent of 3
acres and 20 guntas as the first defendant obtained title over 2 acres and 20 guntas out of the
aforesaid total extent from the second defendant as per registered sale deed dated 04.07.1978 and
the second defendant remained as the owner in possession of the balance one acre. It is his case that
the second defendant had utilised the sale consideration passed on to him for different purposes,
including to pay his debts. It is also relevant to note that the original petitioner in the SLP, from
which this appeal arises, viz., the plaintiff, died during pendency of this proceeding and
subsequently, his legal representatives got substituted as petitioners. Ergo, they are jointly described
hereafter as ‘appellants’, wherever, such reference is required. On the death of the first
defendant/the original second respondent during the pendency of the Second Appeal, his legal
representatives were impleaded as additional respondents and they are respondent Nos. 2 to 6
herein. For the non-compliance with the order of the Hon’ble Chamber Judge, the SLP stood
dismissed qua Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 respondent No. 6, as per order dated 22.11.2017. At the
stage of second appeal the legal heirs of the deceased son of the second defendant viz., the first
respondent herein, were impleaded as respondents therein and they are respondents 7 to 9 herein.
3. The first defendant filed a written statement endorsing the claim and contentions of the plaintiff
and he would also state therein that after executing the sale deed, himself and the second defendant
(the first respondent herein) parted with the possession of the suit land and then, the second
defendant (the first respondent herein) turned dishonest and started disturbing the possession of
the plaintiff. However, the second defendant (the first respondent herein) resisted the suit by filing
written statement and denying the claims and contentions of the plaintiff. His pleadings revealed
from the written statement, in nutshell, read thus:-
The sale deed dated 21.04.1979 (Exhibit 128) is a sham document which was never intended to be
acted upon and in fact, it was never been acted upon. His case, while admitting the execution of sale
deed (Exhibit 128), is that though it was executed as a sale deed, what had actually transpired was
nothing but an execution of sale Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 deed solely as a collateral security to a
money lending transaction viz., for a loan of Rs.1000/- with a promise to re-pay an amount of
Rs.1500/- within 12 months. It is to be noted that in the written statement, the second defendant
(the first respondent herein) further contended that the registered sale deed executed in favour of
the original first defendant was also of the very same nature. He would further plead that in the said
transactions also, in fact there was no passing of sale consideration from the purchasers as in the
case of Exhibit 128 sale deed so as to constitute a valid sale and the other such sale deeds were also
executed without any intention to effect sale of the properties, at the time of borrowing money. To
contend that the plaintiff is disentitled to any relief as sought for, he would also raise two other
contentions; firstly, based on the provisions of Maharashtra Prevention of Fragmentation and
Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as ‘Fragmentation Act’) and secondly, in
the light of the provisions under Section 10 of the Bombay Money Lenders Act, 1946, which get
attracted owing to the facts that he is an original farmer owning only less than 2 hectares of land and
that his annual income is less than Rs.1200/-.
Damodhar (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Tejrao Bajirao Mhaske And Ors. on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4797588/
2
Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023
4. Based on the rival pleadings, the trial Court formulated the following issues and answered them
in the following manner, as can be seen from paragraph 6 of its judgment:-
     ISSUES                            FINDINGS.
     1. Does the Plaintiff proves      In the negative.
     that he purchased the suit
     field from Defendants as
     alleged?
     2. Does he further proves         In the negative.
     that the suit sale deed is for
     legal necessity?
3. If the Plaintiff entitled to In the negative. the possession of the suit field along with enquiry into
mesne.
4. Does the Defendant No.2 In the affirmative. proves that the suit sale deed is bogus, sham and
nominal as alleged?
5. Does the further proves In the affirmative. that the Plaintiff deals in money landing without
licence?
6. Does he further proves In the affirmative.
Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 that the sale deed in suit was made as per the agreement given in para
9 of the Written Statement?
7. Does he further prove that In the affirmative. the suit field is owned by other persons?
8. Does he further proves In the affirmative. that the permission of the District Judge, is required for
the suit sale deed as alleged?
9. Does he further proves In the affirmative. that he is a marginal owner as alleged in para 14 of the
Written Statement.
10. Reliefs and costs? As per final order.
5. On the basis of the findings returned on the issues thus formulated, the trial Court came to the
conclusions that the plaintiff had not purchased the suit field as claimed, that he had failed to prove
that the execution of the sale deed was for a legal necessity of the second defendant. Further, it came
to the conclusion that the sale Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 deed was a sham document and it was
executed only as a security for a money lending transaction and consequently, the original suit was
dismissed with costs.
Damodhar (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Tejrao Bajirao Mhaske And Ors. on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4797588/
3
6. In Regular Civil Appeal No.98 of 1987, filed by the unsuccessful plaintiff, the First Appellate Court
framed the following points for consideration based on the rival submissions and returned the
following findings: -
POINTS FINDINGS
1. Whether it is proved by the plaintiff Yes that defendant No.2 had executed sale deed in his favour
under Ex.
128 and he has become owner of the property?
2. Whether it is proved by the No defendant No.2 that the sale deed Ex. 128 was a nominal
document and was executed by way of collateral security for money lending transaction?
3. Whether Plaintiff is entitled to the Yes possession of suit property?
4. What order? As per final order.
7. Thus, it is evident that upon finding that the trial Court had virtually ignored the legal impact and
effect of Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 registered sale deed (Exhibit 128), in respect of suit land
executed in favour of the appellant therein viz., the plaintiff, the First Appellate Court considered
the issues formulated by focusing that aspect. True that for upholding the sale deed viz. (Exhibit
128), the First Appellate Court had given due weight to the notice dated 27.04.1979 (Exhibit 113),
virtually lawyer notice issued by the second defendant immediately after the transaction, in the
name of the plaintiff and held that it would lend support to the factum of sale effected through sale
deed (Exhibit 128). The First Appellate Court on such consideration and on appreciation of the
materials on record held that the second defendant had failed to prove that the sale transaction was
an outcome of money lending transaction and that the sale deed was nominal in nature.
Consequently, the appeal was allowed, the judgment and decree of the Trial Court was set aside and
the suit for possession on the strength of title was decreed in favour of the plaintiff (the appellant
therein).
8. It is feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the said judgment and decree that the Second Appeal
No.435 of 1995 was filed by the original second defendant viz., the first respondent herein, which
ultimately culminated in the impugned judgment.
Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023
9. A perusal of the impugned judgment would reveal that the High Court re-framed the substantial
questions of law on 15.10.2015 as hereinunder: -
[1] Whether the plaintiff has established his entitlement for a decree of possession of
the suit property on the basis of the sale deed dated 21.04.1979 at Exh.128 executed
by the defendant Nos.1 and 2?
Damodhar (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Tejrao Bajirao Mhaske And Ors. on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4797588/
4
[2] Whether the defendant No.2 has established that the sale deed at Exh.128 was
nominal and by way of collateral security and the said transaction was hit by the
provisions of Section 8 of the Maharashtra Prevention of Fragmentation and
Consolidation of Holdings Act?
[3] While reversing the findings recorded by the trial Court, whether the lower
appellate Court has ignored the findings recorded by the trial Court on the material
facts in the light of undisputed factual position?"
10. Even though the powers under Article 136 of the Constitution of India must be exercised
sparingly, yet there is absolutely nothing in the said Article which prohibits the Supreme Court from
reversing even concurrent findings of the fact by courts below, if it is of the opinion on the basis of
the evidence on record, that Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 affirming the findings of the courts below
would result in a grave miscarriage of justice. It was so held by this Court in Charanjit & Ors. v. State
of Punjab & Anr.1 as also in Adambai Sulemanbhai Ajmeri & Ors. v. State of Gujarat2. Therefore, if a
relevant material legally brought on record and the question of law arising out of its existence were
not considered by the High Court, despite its due consideration by the First Appellate Court, while
reversing the judgment founded on such consideration this Court has necessarily to consider the
same in invocation of the power under Article 136. While considering this appeal, in that view of the
matter, it is only proper and profitable to refer to the following crucial and relevant facts obtained in
the case:
(i) Exhibit 128 is a registered sale deed.
(ii) Its execution is admitted by both the original defendants. (True that the second
defendant (first respondent herein) contends that it was executed as a collateral
security at the time of a money lending transaction).
(iii) The second defendant (first respondent herein) has also admitted execution of registered (2013)
11 SCC 163 (2014) 7 SCC 716 Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 sale deed in favour of defendant No. 1
(earlier in point of time than Exhibit 128) in respect of 2 acres and 20 guntas. (Here also, the second
defendant claimed that the sale deed was executed as a collateral security for the money borrowed
and therefore repayable to him along with the quantified fixed interest thereon).
11. We have already referred to the issues/points formulated by the courts below and the findings
returned by the respective courts which formed the basis for their respective judgments. Bearing in
mind the decisions referred supra and also the relevant facts available, as noted above and also the
relevant provisions under the relevant enactments, to be referred to hereafter, we may proceed to
consider this appeal.
12. As noted earlier, after reversing the judgment and decree of the First Appellate Court, the High
Court restored the decree of the trial Court. In this context, it is apt to note the re-framed substantial
question of law No. 3 by the High Court, extracted above, that carries the query whether, while
reversing the findings recorded by the trial Court, the lower appellate Court had ignored the findings
Damodhar (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Tejrao Bajirao Mhaske And Ors. on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4797588/
5
recorded by it on the material facts in the Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 light of undisputed factual
position. We may hasten to add here that a bare perusal of the impugned judgment would reveal
that after framing such a question of law the High Court did the very seemingly attributed act
inasmuch as it did not consider the legal impact and effect of Ext. 128, registered sale deed, which
was taken into consideration by the First Appellate Court, while reversing the judgment and decree
of the First Appellate Court.
13. A scanning of the trial Court judgment would reveal indubitably that despite the admission of the
execution and registration of Exhibit 128 sale deed dated 21.04.1979 by the second defendant in
favour of the plaintiff and also that of the sale deed dated 04.07.1978 by him to the first defendant, it
had failed to consider the legal effect and impact of execution and registration of such a sale deed in
view of the provisions under the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, as also the Registration Act, 1908,
and sans such consideration accepted the second defendant’s contention that it is a sham document.
Paragraph 7 of the judgment of the trial Court would reveal that despite the admission of execution
and registration of Ext. 128 sale deed dated 21.04.1979 by the second defendant as also by the first
defendant, the trial Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 Court held that the burden of proving the factum of
execution of sale deed and passing of the consideration amount was on the plaintiff. The trial Court
had also failed to consider the relevance and application of Section 92 of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872 while appreciating the oral evidence against Ext. 128. Evidently, the trial Court accepted the
case of the second defendant that the said sale deed was one executed as a collateral security to a
money lending transaction and that it was never intended to be acted upon. The trial Court has also
held the sale deed virtually invalid by accepting the contention that the transaction violated the
provision under Section 8 of the Fragmentation Act and in that regard the sale deed dated
04.07.1978 executed between defendant Nos. 1 and 2 was held as one creating a ‘fragment’ and
therefore, violating the prohibition. This was done without looking into the question as to its
jurisdiction to entertain and adjudicate upon such a plea in view of the statutory bar of jurisdiction
under Section 36A of the Fragmentation Act. In that regard it is noteworthy that nothing was
specifically mentioned in paragraph 14 or anywhere else in the written statement filed by the second
defendant regarding the violation of the provisions under the Fragmentation Act and, in fact, Civil
Appeal No.930 of 2023 only vague reference was made on that aspect in paragraph 16 reproduced as
under: -
“16. …In event, according to provision of Consolidation of Act and Prevention of
Fragmentation Act, the plaintiff not entitled to any relief.”
14. In view of the aforementioned facts as also taking note of the contentions raised on behalf of the
contesting respondents, in support of the impugned judgment, that the First Appellate Court failed
to consider at all the voidness of the sale transaction of 2 acres and 20 guntas between original
defendants 1 and 2, its impact on the sale of consequentially created ‘fragmentation’ of one acre by
the second defendant and the whole sale transaction effected under Exhibit 128 sale deed by
operation of the Fragmentation Act and further that the said aspect was rightly considered by the
High Court, we think it only proper to deal with that matter appropriately.
Damodhar (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Tejrao Bajirao Mhaske And Ors. on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4797588/
6
15. At the outset, we may say that there is dichotomy between the contention of the first respondent/
the second defendant founded on the Fragmentation Act as mentioned above and also his
contention of absolute Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 absence of a transaction partaking the real
nature of sale. This is because Section 9 (1) of the Fragmentation Act makes void only the transfer or
partition of any land contrary to the provisions of the said Act. The word ‘transfer’ is not defined
under the Fragmentation Act though the expression ‘land’ has been defined thereunder. As per
Section 2 (5) of the Fragmentation Act, the term ‘land’ means, ‘agricultural land whether alienated
or unalienated’. In the said circumstances, to know the meaning of the words ‘transfer of any land’
used in Section 9 (1) of the Fragmentation Act, one may have to see the definition of ‘transfer of
property’ under Section 5 of the ‘Transfer of Property Act, 1882, (hereinafter referred to as, the TP
Act’), which reads thus:-
5. “Transfer of property” defined. —In the following sections “transfer of property”
means an act by which a living person conveys property, in present or in future, to
one or more other living persons, or to himself, [or it himself] and one or more other
living persons; and “to transfer property” is to perform such act.
[in this section “living person” includes a company or association or body of individuals, whether
incorporated or not, but nothing herein contained Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 shall affect any law
for the time being in force relating to transfer of property to or by companies, associations or bodies
of individuals.]
16. In the contextual situation it is also relevant to refer to the definition of ‘sale’ given under Section
54 of the TP Act, which reads thus:-
54. “Sale” defined.—“Sale” is a transfer of ownership in exchange for a price paid or
promised or part-paid and part-promised.
17. The term ‘transfer’ is a word in a broader sense and the word ‘sale’ is a specific word. Sale, going
by the definition under T.P. Act, presupposes transfer from one person to another of the right in
property and in other words, in sale, the ownership of the property is transferred. A conjoint reading
of Section 54 of the TP Act and Section 17 of the Indian Registration Act, 1908, mandates that
transfer of ownership of any land worth more than Rs.100/- shall be effected by a registered deed.
Therefore, transfer of a land worth more than Rs.100/- by a registered deed implies transmutation
of all rights as the vendor possessed in the property concerned. We are not oblivious of the fact the
mere registration of a document is no proof of its execution.
Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 We will deal with this aspect a little later. It will not be inappropriate to
look into the object of the Fragmentation Act, in the context of the contentions. It runs as under:-
“Whereas it is expedient to prevent the fragmentation of agricultural holdings and to
provide for the consolidation of agricultural holdings for the purpose of the better
cultivation thereof;”
Damodhar (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Tejrao Bajirao Mhaske And Ors. on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4797588/
7
18. Thus, obviously, it is not the object or purpose of the Fragmentation Act to totally prohibit or
prevent transfer of land within any notified ‘local area’, but it is only aimed at preventing the
fragmentation of agricultural holdings and to provide for the consolidation of agricultural holdings
for the purpose of the better cultivation thereof.
19. In the context of the above mentioned rival pleadings, contentions and the position revealed
from the facts and the provisions, the question to be considered is whether the second defendant
herein had made out any case for attracting the provisions of the Fragmentation Act /or in other
words, whether the trial Court was right in applying the provisions under the said Act and the High
Court was legally correct in restoring Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 the decree of the trial Court after
reversing the judgment and decree of the First Appellate Court, in view of the mutually annihilative
pleas taken up by the second defendant viz., the first respondent herein and accepted by the trial
Court and the High Court. Contextually, it is apposite to state that though in a suit a defendant is
entitled to raise alternative inconsistent plea he could not be permitted to raise pleas which are
mutually destructive of each other and raising such pleas would only work out to his detriment.
20. Evidently, while entertaining the contentions founded on the Fragmentation Act raised by the
second defendant, the trial Court as also the High Court have not bestowed attention to the statutory
bar of jurisdiction under Section 36A of the Fragmentation Act which reads thus:-
[36A. (1) No Civil Court or Mamlatdar’s Court shall have jurisdiction to settle, decide
or deal with any question which is by or under this Act required to be settled, decided
or dealt with by the State Government or any officer or authority.
Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023
21. In the above context, it is also relevant to refer to Section 36 B (1) of the Fragmentation Act. It
reads as under:
[36B. (1) If any suit instituted in any Civil Court or Mamlatdar’s Court involves any
issues which are required to be settled, decided or dealt with by any authority
competent to settle, decide or deal with such issues under this Act (hereinafter
referred to as the ‘competent authority’) the Civil Court or Mamlatdar’s Court shall
stay the suit and refer such issues to such competent authority for determination.
22. It is also worthwhile in the contextual situation to refer to Section 9 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as, ‘the CPC’), which confers jurisdiction upon the Civil
Courts to determine all disputes of civil nature, unless the same is barred under a statute, either
expressly or by necessary implication. We shall not be oblivious of the fact that the second defendant
had not so far approached the competent authority under the Fragmentation Act to nullify the
action undertaken under the conveyance, resorting to the remedy contemplated under the
Fragmentation Act, going by the materials on record. At any rate, there is no such case for him. We
made this statement because the Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 first proviso to Section 9(3) of the
Fragmentation Act would reveal that the automatic voidness would not be attracted to a transfer of
Damodhar (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Tejrao Bajirao Mhaske And Ors. on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4797588/
8
land contrary to the provisions of the Fragmentation Act, if it was made on or after 15th day of
November, 1965 and before the date of commencement of Maharashtra Prevention of
Fragmentation and Consolidation of Holdings (Amendment) Act, 2017 and that apart, Section 31,
referred therein, which puts bar for sale, makes it clear under clause (iii) Sub-section (3) thereof,
that the said bar would not apply to any land which is to be transferred to an agriculturist, in its
entirety provided such transfer is not creating a fragment. We may hasten to add here that we shall
not be understood to have held that the subject suit involves any issue(s) which is required to be
settled, decided or dealt with any authority competent to settle, decide or deal with such issue under
the Fragmentation Act. As a matter of fact, the very applicability of the Fragmentation Act itself on
sale transactions would depend upon the question whether the area in question falls under a
Municipal Council or not and if it does not, then on the further question as to whether it falls within
a ‘local area’ notified under the Fragmentation Act. Above all, the case Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023
attempted to be projected and proved by the second respondent is that in regard to sale deed dated
04.07.1978 and the sale deed dated 21.04.1979 (Ext.128) they were never intended to be acted upon
and in fact, they were never been acted upon. If that is accepted, then, there is absolutely no
question of applicability of the provisions of ‘the Fragmentation Act’ as they would apply only in the
eventuality of an actual transfer of land or partition of land subject to the satisfaction of other
conditions.
23. A conjoint reading of Section 36A and 36B of the Fragmentation Act would reveal that when a
suit is instituted in a Civil Court, the Court concerned has to consider if the suit involves any issue(s)
which is/are required to be settled, decided or dealt with by any competent authority to settle,
decide or dealt with, such issues under the said Act. If it does, then after staying the suit the said
issue(s) is to be referred to such competent authority for determination. Apparently, no such
consideration had been made by the trial Court as also by the High Court.
24. Taking note of the fact that the regular civil suit is of the year 1979, at this distance of time and
also for the reasons stated hereinabove and to be unfolded Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 hereinafter,
we are not inclined to remand the matter to decide the question whether the second defendant/ the
first respondent herein had succeeded in establishing that the subject suit involves any issue
required to be settled, decided or dealt with by any competent authority under the said Act and
therefore the subject suit was to be stayed as mandated under Section 36B of the Fragmentation Act
and such issue was to be referred to such competent authority for determination. The well- nigh
settled position is that the jurisdiction of the Court has to be determined based on the averments in
the plaint and it cannot be determined only on the basis of the uncorroborated averments made in
the written statement. This position is unquestionably applicable in the case on hand in view of the
specific wordings under Section 36B of the Fragmentation Act viz., if any suit instituted in any Civil
Court or Mamlatdar’s Court involves any issues which are required to be settled, decided or dealt
with by any authority competent to settle, decide or dealt with under this Act. The words ‘if any suit,
instituted in Civil Court’ and ‘involves any issues’ employed in Section 36B of the Fragmentation Act
would undoubtedly point to the fact that involvement or otherwise of such issues mentioned under
the section in Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 ‘the suit instituted in a Civil Court’ is the factor deciding
the applicability of the procedures prescribed under Section 36B, of the Fragmentation Act.
Therefore, the question whether such issue(s) falling under Section 36B of the Fragmentation Act is
Damodhar (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Tejrao Bajirao Mhaske And Ors. on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4797588/
9
involved or not was to be decided with reference to the averments in the plaint. On their own the
plaint averments did not disclose involvement of any such issue(s) requiring a reference to a
competent authority under the Fragmentation Act. Since the issue is whether the suit involves such
issue(s), we will refer to the written statement as well. We have already referred to the sole, vague
averment in the written statement filed by the second defendant in the suit referring to the
Fragmentation Act, which in no way could construe as a counter-claim capable of treating as a plaint
and governed by the rules applicable to plaints in terms of Order VIII Rule 6 A, CPC and enabling
the court to pronounce a final judgment in the same suit, both on the original claim and on the
counter-claim. That apart, we have also already noted the case projected and proved by the second
defendant that Ext.128 sale deed and sale deed dated 04.07.1978 were never intended to be acted
upon. Thus, going by his mutually destructive pleas as well, no case for attracting the provisions of
‘the Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 Fragmentation Act’ was made out by the second defendant.
25. In the above context the decision of this court in Jag Mohan Chawla and Anr. v. Dera Radha
Swami Satsang & Ors.3 is noteworthy. It was held therein that in sub-rule (1) of Rule 6A, CPC the
language is so couched with words of wide width as to enable the parties to bring his own
independent cause of action in respect of any claim that would be subject matter of an independent
suit. It is no longer confined to money claim or to cause of action of the same nature as original
cause of action of the plaintiff and it need not relate to or be connected with the original cause of
action or matter pleaded by the plaintiff. It was further held that the words “any right or claim in
respect of a cause of action accruing with the defendant” would show that the cause of action from
which the counter claim arises need not necessarily arise from or have any nexus with the cause of
action of the plaintiff.
26. The decision of this court in Rohit Singh and Ors. v. State of Bihar4 also assumes relevance in
the above context. This court held that a defendant could not be (1996) 4 SCC 699 (2006) 12 SCC
734 Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 permitted to raise counter-claim against co-defendant because by
virtue of Order VIII Rule 6A, CPC, it could be raised by defendant against the claim of the plaintiff.
27. Now, it is required to be noted that despite the lack of foundational facts attracting the
applicability of the ‘Fragmentation Act’ (in fact, there is no serious consideration of such aspects by
the trial Court and the High Court) and the position revealed from the aforesaid decisions and the
provisions and on the question of raising of any right or claim by way of counter-claims, we are at a
loss to understand as to how the trial Court and the High Court came to frame issues and consider
such issue(s), that too, ignoring the statutory bar of jurisdiction to go into and decide, issue No.9
framed by the trial Court, as extracted in paragraph 4 hereinabove and issue No. 2 re-framed by the
High Court, as extracted in paragraph 9 hereinabove.
28. As relates issue No. 9, framed by the trial Court, at the risk of repetition, we will state that in
regard to ‘the Fragmentation Act’ only a very vague plea was taken in the written statement by the
second defendant viz., “In event, according to the provisions of Consolidation of Act and Prevention
of Fragmentation Act, the plaintiff is not entitled to any relief.” Thus, when the indisputable Civil
Appeal No.930 of 2023 position is that no counter-claim, within the meaning of Order VIII Rule 6A,
CPC was made by the second defendant and no averment whatsoever was made specifically in the
Damodhar (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Tejrao Bajirao Mhaske And Ors. on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4797588/
10
written statement filed by him how such an issue as to whether ‘he had proved to be a marginal
owner’ in the light of the ‘Fragmentation Act’ arise for consideration. This is because the well-nigh
settled position of law is that one could be permitted to let in evidence only in tune with his
pleadings. We shall not also be oblivious of the basic rule of law of pleadings, founded on the
principle of secundum allegata et probate, that a party is not allowed to succeed where he has not set
up the case which he wants to substantiate. Whether the area in question is a ‘local area’ notified
under the ‘Fragmentation Act’ so as to have application of the provisions of the said Act, even if it is
so, whether the sale transaction of one acre by the second defendant is legally permissible or could
be regularized etc., were not raised or considered, as is evident from the judgment of the trial Court.
This issue was considered by the trial Court in paragraph 26 thereof thus: -
“26. So far as issue no. 2 (sic.no.9) is concerned, admittedly, the Defendant No. 2 is
marginal owner of the suit property. So, Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 under the
section 8A of the fragmentation Act, the sale deed on Exh-128 in regard to the suit
property executed by the Defendant No. 2 in respect of 1 acre of land as per Plaintiff’s
case is barred by this section. So, section of fragmentation A it also is applicable to
the legality of the sale deed Exh. 128. Therefore, issue No. 9 is required to be decided
in favour of the Defendant No. 2 and I therefore, answer issue No. 9 in the
affirmative.”
29. Now, we will refer to issue No. 2 re-framed by the High Court in regard to the application of the
‘Fragmentation Act’. Before dealing with the matter any further, it is only appropriate to refer to the
following recital from paragraph 24 of the impugned judgment of the High Court:-
“24. The defendant No. 2 does not dispute that he had sold one acre of land to the
plaintiff by the sale deed at Ext. 128 for the consideration of Rs.
3,000/- and he has shown his readiness and willingness to deliver the possession of it to the
plaintiff.” Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 Obviously, the First Appellate Court also arrived at the same
finding in respect of the said extent of land and this fact has been duly taken care of by the High
Court in paragraph 15 of its judgment. Even after, finding as such the High Court interfered with
that part of Ext. 128 sale deed and held it as void under sub-section (1) of Section 9 of the
‘Fragmentation Act’ as if a claim by way of counter-claim was made by the second defendant. The
High Court, in paragraph 24 of the impugned judgment held thus:-
“24. …However, the sale or transfer of one acre of land out of Survey No. 20/2 by the
registered sale-deed at Exhibit 128 is the sale of fragment, which is hit by Section 8 of
the said Act, and such sale becomes, therefore, void under sub- section (1) of the
Section 9 therein. The second portion of the substantial question of law at Serial No.
[2] is answered accordingly. The plaintiff cannot, therefore, seek possession on the
basis of such sale-deed.
30. Thus, a careful scanning of the impugned judgment would reveal that virtually, the High Court
considered the validity of the sale deed dated 04.07.1978 executed by the second defendant in
Damodhar (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Tejrao Bajirao Mhaske And Ors. on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4797588/
11
favour of the first defendant Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 under ‘the Fragmentation Act’, without
directly framing an issue precisely on the same and then, decided the validity of the sale deed dated
21.04.1979 executed by the second defendant in favour of the plaintiff. We have already taken note
of the decision of this Court in Rohit Singh’s case (supra), wherein it is observed that a defendant
could not be permitted to raise counter-claim against co-defendant because by virtue of Order VIII
Rule 6A, CPC it could be raised by a defendant against the claim of the plaintiff. Be that as it may, in
the instant case, no such counter-claim, which can be treated as a plaint in terms of the said
provision and thereby, enabling the court to pronounce a final judgment in the same suit, both on
the original claim and on the counter- claim, was filed by the second defendant. That apart,
indisputably, the second defendant did not dispute the execution of the registered sale deed dated
04.07.1978 by him in favour of the first defendant and in his written statement the second
defendant had only stated that according to the provisions of the Fragmentation Act the plaintiff
was not entitled to any relief. When that be so, legally how can the High Court hold the sale deed
dated 04.07.1978 executed by the second defendant in favour of the first defendant, void under the
provisions of the Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 Fragmentation Act without precisely framing an issue
and then, based on it, going on to consider the validity of Ext. 128 sale deed dated 21.04.1979
executed by the second defendant in favour of the plaintiff, even-after noting the finding of the First
Appellate Court that as relates the sale of one acre of land under Ext.128 sale deed the second
defendant did not have any grievance and then, observing, in tune with the same, that the second
defendant did not dispute that he sold one acre of land to the plaintiff as per Ext.128 sale deed for
the consideration of Rs. 3000/- and had shown readiness and willingness to deliver the possession
of it to the plaintiff. To make matters worse, the High Court has failed to consider the crucial issue
whether the plaintiff is entitled to possession of the suit land on the strength of the registered
Ext.128 sale deed executed by the defendants.
31. The long and short of this long discussion is that for all the reasons mentioned above, the
decision of the High Court on the validity of the sale transaction covered under the sale deed dated
04.07.1978 executed by the second defendant in favour of the first defendant, in terms of the
provisions under the Fragmentation Act (when that question was not legally available to be Civil
Appeal No.930 of 2023 considered in the subject suit) and the virtual declaration of the said sale as
void, are absolutely unsustainable. It is the product of erroneous assumption of jurisdiction and also
erroneous and perverse appreciation of evidence. It being the foundation for holding the registered
sale deed dated 21.04.1979 (Ext.128) as void under Sub-section (1) of Section 9 of the Fragmentation
Act, it is unsustainable. The various reasons mentioned above would support our conclusion as
above.
32. Having held as above, we will now proceed to consider the question whether the upturning of the
judgment and decree of the First Appellate Court, which held the sale deed dated 21.04.1979
(Ext.128) as one transferring ownership of the suit land by the plaintiff, by the High Court can be
sustained. There can be no doubt with respect to the position that where a deed of sale had been
duly executed and registered, its delivery and payment of consideration have been endorsed thereon
it would amount to a full transfer of ownership so as to entitle its purchaser to maintain a suit for
possession of the property sold. The very object of the mandate for registration of transfer of an
immovable property worth more than Rs. 100/- under Section 54 of the Transfer of Property Act,
Damodhar (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Tejrao Bajirao Mhaske And Ors. on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4797588/
12
1882, read with Section 17 of the Indian Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 Registration Act, is primarily
to give certainty to title. When execution is challenged, registration by itself is no proof of execution
and proof of complying with Section 67 of the Evidence Act is necessary. There can be no reason to
disbelieve a recital contained in a registered sale deed regarding payment of consideration, executed
by the vendor. Hence, if it is said to have already been paid, going by the registered sale deed,
certainly it is for the vendor asserting non-passing of consideration to prove the said asserted fact.
Bearing in mind the aforesaid aspects the aforesaid question has to be approached.
33. It is common case that the sale deed dated 21.04.1979 (Ext.128) is registered and its executants
viz., the first defendant endorsed its execution and fully endorsed its contents and the second
executant viz., the second defendant also endorsed its execution, but depose differently on its
intention. Thus, the admitted position is that its execution and registration is not in dispute. Since it
is a registered sale deed and its execution is not in dispute it must carry a presumption that the
transaction was a genuine one. Thus, evidently, the dispute is only in regard to the nature of
transaction. Being a registered one and apparently containing the Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023
stipulations of transfer of right, title and interest in favour of the vendee on the land involved
therein and described therein and also recital regarding receipt of sale consideration the burden was
entirely on the second defendant to establish otherwise and to prove that it did not reflect the true
nature of transaction. A perusal of Ext.128 would reveal that the extent of property is recorded
therein as an area of ‘1 Hector, 42 R (3.20)’ in Survey No. 20/2 of village – Gangalgaon, Taluk –
Chikhli of Buldana District. Before delving further into the matter, it is relevant to note that the First
Appellate Court observed and held, after appreciating the evidence on record, that as relates one
acre out of the total extent of 3 acres 20 guntas sold by the second defendant comprised in Survey
No. 20/2 as per Ext.128, the second defendant did not have any grievance. In other words, what was
found was that the grievance was only relating the balance extent of 2 acres and 20 guntas
comprised in Survey No. 20/2 which, as per records, sold earlier by the second defendant, as per
sale deed dated 04.07.1978, to the first defendant. In this context, it is also pertinent to note that in
paragraph 24 of the impugned judgment the Hon’ble High Court itself observed and held, as
extracted hereinabove, that the defendant No. 2 Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 did not dispute that he
had sold one acre of land to the plaintiff as per the sale deed (Ext.128) for the consideration of Rs.
3000/- and that he had shown his readiness and willingness to deliver the possession of it to the
plaintiff. Paragraph 26 of the impugned judgment would show that while rejecting the finding of the
First Appellate Court on the inconsistency of the stand of the second defendant the High Court held
thus:-
“There is no inconsistency in the stand taken by the defendant No. 2 either in the
written statement or in the notice at Exhibit 113. The defendant No. 2 is consistent in
his stand that he has sold one acre of land by the sale-deed at Exhibit 128 for a total
consideration of Rs. 3000/-, but has denied to have sold 2 acres and 20 guntas of
land to the plaintiff.” When that be the indisputable factual position all the other
contentions raised by the second respondent against the plaintiff, including money
lending, non-
Damodhar (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Tejrao Bajirao Mhaske And Ors. on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4797588/
13
passing of sale consideration in respect of the said extent of one acre would all become
inconsequential and unsustainable and unnecessary to be gone into. Even otherwise, in view of the
factum of registration of Ext.128 and admission of its execution and the recording of payment of
consideration thereon, the second Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 respondent was not justified in
raising grievance, initially, even against the sale of the aforesaid extent of one acre.
34. Now, what remains to be looked into is the grievance of the second respondent with respect to
the balance extent of 2 acres and 20 guntas involved in the transaction. In the context of the
contentions raised by the second defendant viz., the first respondent in this appeal, what is relevant
and crucial is not only the factum of registration of Ext.128 and its execution by the second
defendant but also the admission of execution of sale deed dated 04.07.1978 by him in favour of the
first defendant. True that the second defendant contended that it was executed as a collateral
security for a money lending transaction. We have noted earlier, by referring to the decision in Rohit
Singh’s Case (supra) that a defendant could not be permitted to raise counter-claim against a
co-defendant as by virtue of Order VIII Rule 6A, CPC, it could be raised by a defendant only against
the claim of the plaintiff. Evidently, the High Court did not frame the validity of the sale deed dated
04.07.1978 executed by the second defendant in favour of the first defendant as a question of law
though the trial Court also arrived at a finding on this issue without framing it as a Civil Appeal
No.930 of 2023 specific issue. The indisputable fact is that the said sale deed dated 04.07.1978 was
admittedly, executed and registered about nine (9) months prior to the execution and registration of
Ext. 128 sale deed. Ext. 128 would reveal that it involves the entire extent of 3 acres 20 guntas in
Survey No. 20/2 of Gangalgaon village and the first defendant is also an executant of the same. The
observation and finding of the High Court in the first limb of paragraph 24 of the impugned
judgment that the second defendant did not dispute the sale of one acre of land to the plaintiff as per
Ext. 128 for the consideration of Rs. 3000/- would indicate that the balance amount of Rs. 7000/-
was the consideration for the balance extent of land covered under Ext. 128. Since the validity of the
sale deed dated 04.07.1978 was not an issue/question that could be raised by the second defendant
against the first defendant in the subject suit and was rightly, not raised as an issue, the first
defendant not only did not dispute the sale of such extent to the plaintiff but admitted the joint
execution of Ext. 128 and receipt of sale consideration, as incorporated in Ext. 128 and since the
second defendant got no case that he had assailed the validity of the sale deed dated 04.07.1978
either before any competent authority or competent Civil Court Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 this
question needs no further elaboration. An inter-se dispute on the validity of the sale deed dated
04.07.1978, if at all between the second and first defendants, could not have been considered in the
subject-suit, for the reasons already mentioned as it would amount to adjudication of right or a
claim, by way of counter-claim by one defendant against his co-defendant. Finding on its voidness
under the Fragmentation Act was already held as unsustainable by us.
35. In the context of the contentions of the second defendant/the first respondent herein against
Ext. 128, taking note of its registration and the admission of its execution it is only proper to refer to
Sections 91 and 92 of the Evidence Act. Certainly, parol evidence is admissible to show that a
contract embodied in a document was never intended to be acted upon but was made for some
collateral purpose. But, in view of the specific finding in the judgment of the High Court, which is in
favour of the second defendant, that the consistent stand of the second defendant is that he has sold
Damodhar (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Tejrao Bajirao Mhaske And Ors. on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4797588/
14
one acre of land by the sale deed at Ext.128 for a total consideration of Rs. 3000/- and admission of
execution of sale deed dated 04.07.1978 in favour of the first defendant and in the absence of
anything on record Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023 establishing annulment of the said sale deed and
also in view of the fact that the first defendant is also a co- executant. We do not think it proper or
necessary to enter into the extrinsic evidence relating sale transaction covered by sale deed dated
04.07.1978. It is to be noted that here, by virtue of Section 54, of the Transfer of Property Act and
Section 17 of the Registration Act and since the immovable property was worth more than Rs. 100/-
Ext.128 was reduced in writing and registered. The intention of the parties are also reflected
specifically in Ext.128 and at the same, nothing reflecting a contra- intention not to pass the title and
ownership in present even impliedly therein. In other words, the need to take into consideration the
surrounding circumstances and the conduct of parties in deciding the passing of title would arise
only if the recitals in the document are indecisive and ambiguous. The oral evidence of the second
defendant could not override the registered Ext. 128 sale deed, as held by the First Appellate Court
in the facts, circumstances and evidence on record in this case. In such circumstances, no other
question(s) need be considered. The upshot of our consideration as above, is that the High Court has
committed a serious error based on perverse appreciation of evidence, in setting Civil Appeal
No.930 of 2023 aside the judgment and decree of the First Appellate Court decreeing the subject
suit and in restoring the decree of dismissal of the suit of the trial Court.
36. In the result, we allow the appeal with costs and set aside the judgment and final order dated
30.10.2015 in Second Appeal No. 435 of 1995 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay,
Nagpur Bench restoring the decree of the court of Joint Civil Judge, Junior Division, Chikhli in
Regular Civil Suit No. 257 of 1985. Consequently, we restore the judgment and decree of the Court of
Additional District Judge, Buldana in Regular Civil Appeal No. 98 of 1987 arising from the judgment
and decree in Regular Civil Suit No. 257 of 1985.
….…...............,J.
(M.R. Shah) .........................,J.
(C.T. Ravikumar) New Delhi;
May 04, 2023 Civil Appeal No.930 of 2023
Damodhar (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Tejrao Bajirao Mhaske And Ors. on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4797588/
15
