[2023:RJ-JD:18803]
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE FOR RAJASTHAN AT
JODHPUR
S.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 7094/2023
Pooja  Bhambi  D/o  Radheshyam,  Aged  About  23  Years,  R/o
Behind  Union  Bank  Mangliyawas,  Tehsil  Peesangan,  District
Ajmer, Rajasthan.
----Petitioner
Versus
1. 
State  Of  Rajasthan,  Through  Principal  Secretary,
Department  Of  Forest,  Government  Of  Rajasthan,
Government Secretariat, Jaipur.
2. 
Principal Chief Conservator Of Forest, Jaipur.
3. 
Deputy Conservator Of Forest, Ajmer.
4. 
Rajasthan  Staff  Selection  Board,  State  Agriculture
Management  Institution  Premises,  Durgapura,  Jaipur,
Rajasthan.
----Respondents
For Petitioner(s) 
: 
None
For Respondent(s)
: 
Mr. D.S. Jasol
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VINIT KUMAR MATHUR
Order
02/06/2023
The present writ petition has been filed with the following
prayers:-
"i. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction in the nature
thereof, the respondents be directed to give appointment to
the petitioner on the post of Forest Guard as the petitioner
secured more marks than the last cut off in her category. 
ii. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction in the nature
thereof thereby, direct the respondents, the measurement
of  chest  of  the  petitioner  may  kindly  be  made  properly
through qualified doctors at SMS Hospital at Jaipur of AIMS
Hospital at Jodhpur.
iii.  Issue  an  appropriate  writ,  order  or  direction  in  the
nature thereof thereby, the action of the respondents may
kindly  be  declared  illegal  by  which  they  have  wrongly
measured the chest of the petitioner.
                
[2023:RJ-JD:18803]
(2 of 3)
[CW-7094/2023]
This Court after having considered the submission made on
behalf  of  the  parties  passed  an  order  on  24.05.2023  in  the
following terms:-
“Heard learned counsel for the petitioner.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that
in  the  selection  process  for  the  Forest  Guards,  the
chest measurement of the petitioner is found below 79
cms, however, the chest measurement taken by the
Police  Dispensary,  Ajmer  is  normal  80  cms  and
expanded 85 cms. Learned counsel, therefore, submits
that there is difference of measurement of the chest of
the  petitioner  by  the  authorities  of  the  respondent
Department  and  the  Police  Dispensary,  Ajmer.
Therefore,  the  chest  measurement  of  the  petitioner
may be got done from an independent body.
In that view of the matter, the Superintendent of
All  India  Institute  of  Medical  Sciences,  Jodhpur  is
directed  to  constitute  a  Medical  Board  consisting  of
three persons who will take measurement of the chests
of the petitioner and submit a report to this Court. 
The petitioner is directed to appear before the
Superintendent  of  All  India  Institute  of  Medical
Sciences, Jodhpur,   along with copy of this order on
26/05/2023.  
Learned counsel for the respondent may depute
a  representative  on  26/05/2023  before  the
Superintendent  of  All  India  Institute  of  Medical
Sciences, Jodhpur,  if they so desire.
Meanwhile and till the next date of hearing, the
respondents  shall  keep  five  posts  of  Forest  Guards
vacant.
Shri  Digvijay  Singh  Jasol,  learned  counsel,
appears for the respondents and seeks some time to
file reply.
Time prayed for is allowed.
List the matter on 01/06/2023.”
In  pursuance  of  the  direction  issued  by  this  Court  on
24.05.2023,  a  Board  was  constituted  by  All  India  Institute  of
Medical Sciences, Jodhpur for examination of the petitioner. The
Board has submitted its report in a sealed cover before this Court.
                
[2023:RJ-JD:18803]
(3 of 3)
[CW-7094/2023]
The  report  is  opened  and  the  opinion  of  the  Board  reads  as
under:-
Pooja Bhambi S/o Sh. Radhesyam
        Opinion by the Medical Board:-
On examination of the petitioner, the board has found that 
the Chest Measurement of the individual is as follows :-
Chest –    Normal 79.5 cm
                Expanded 84.5 cm
The original copy of the report is taken on record and the
registry  is  directed  to  supply  the  certified  copy  of  the  report
received  from  All  India  Institute  of  Medical  Sciences,  Jodhpur
forthwith to the parties.
In pursuance of the report  received,  the respondents are
directed to consider the candidature of the petitioner in terms of
the report as per Rules.
In view of the above, the present writ petition is disposed of.
(VINIT KUMAR MATHUR),J
5-/Vivek/-
