Supreme Court of India
Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi And Anr vs Anand Arya And Ors on 5 February, 2016
Author: A Sikri
Bench: T.S. Thakur, A.K. Sikri, R. Banumathi
                                                                              REPORTABLE
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.     888     OF 2016
              (ARISING OUT OF S.L.P. (CIVIL) NO. 35037 OF 2015)
|GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI AND ANR.             |.....APPELLANT(S)            |
|                                           |                             |
|VERSUS                                     |                             |
|ANAND ARYA AND ORS.                        |.....RESPONDENT(S)           |
                                    WITH
                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.   889    OF 2016
              (ARISING OUT OF S.L.P. (CIVIL) NO. 35038 OF 2015)
                               J U D G M E N T
A.K. SIKRI, J.
Notice, returnable forthwith.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 (hereinafter referred to as the “respondents”), who are the real contesting
respondents, have appeared on Caveat and accepted notice. Keeping in view the nature of order
which we propose to pass in these appeals, it was not found necessary to serve other respondents.
Insofar as counsel for the appellants as well as counsel for the respondents are concerned, they were
ready to argue the matter finally. Accordingly, we heard the matter finally at this stage itself.
Leave granted in both these matters.
The appellants in these two appeals are Government of NCT of Delhi and Delhi Transport
Corporation respectively. They feel aggrieved by the orders dated October 20, 2015 passed by the
High Court of Delhi in CM No. 12299 of 2015 in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 5481 of 2011. In order to
have a glimpse of the controversy, we may state that the matter pertains to the construction of Bus
Depot by the appellants on an area situated next to Nizamuddin Bridge and behind I.P. Power
Station. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 5481 of 2011 was disposed of by the High Court vide orders dated
September 13, 2015. It was found that as per the Master Plan 2021 (MPD 2021) for Delhi the
aforesaid Bus Depot, popularly known as Millennium Bus Depot, was shown as “river flood plain”
and on such are no construction could be carried out as per MPD 2021. The High Court, however,
gave six months' time to the authorities to change the Master Plan, as per law, if the same was
permissible, failing which the Millennium Bus Depot was to be removed from the site. This has not
Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi And Anr vs Anand Arya And Ors on 5 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/193337711/
1
happened, though the order of the High Court is dated September 13, 2012. The DTC filed an
application for extension of time , i.e., CM No. 12299 of 2015. By the impugned order dated October
20, 2015, the High Court has rejected the prayer for extension of time and dismissed the application.
It is this order which is the subject matter of the instant appeals.
The matter has some history. In order to appreciate the position taken by the parties on the either
side, it would be necessary to traverse the historical trajectory. As we unfold the events that have
taken place, the narration thereof would not only reflect the position taken by the parties on either
side, some of the answers which apparently flow from these facts would also automatically become
available. For these reasons, we take note of these events that are material for these appeals but
avoiding unnecessary details at the same time.
As is clear from the glimpse of the lis mentioned above, the appellants have constructed Millennium
Bus Depot at the site in question. As per the respondents, the site is river flood plain and as per
Master Plan – 2021, no construction can be carried out on such an area. The area in question is next
to Nizamuddin Bridge and behind I.P. Power Station and falls in Sub- Zone-06, Zone-O, between
Nizamuddin Railway Bridge and National Highway-24 measuring 390 hectares. This prompted the
respondents to file Writ Petition (Civil) No. 5481 of 2011 by way of Public Interest Litigation. The
petition was filed at a time when the construction was still underway. The respondents wanted stay
of construction as well. However, no such interim prayer was granted. By the time the matter came
up for final hearing, the construction had been completely carried out and DTC Bus Depot had
started functioning therefrom. Under these circumstances, the respondents pressed their relief for
demolition of the construction and restoration of area in its original condition.
It was averred by the respondents that the construction in question amounted to encroachment on
river flood plain/river front resulting a change in the land use. It was also stated that as per the
Master Plan, the area is earmarked for recreation purposes on the West Bank (Clause 9.2.1). It was
pointed out that Draft Zonal Plan of the area was published in July, 2008 for the purpose of inviting
objections. The Zonal Plan has specified the land use of the River and confirmed that it would be
only for recreational use such as Biodiversity Park, Botanical Park, Forest etc. which would help in
regenerating the environment. The respondents also pointed out that the DDA vide its
communication dated December 2, 2010 in response to RTI query had confirmed that a 6 hectares
strip of land between Akshardham Complex and the Commonwealth Games Village was indeed
designated as 'Parking' in the approved lay out plan. The Delhi Urban Art Commission (hereinafter
referred to as 'the DUAC') after its inspection carried out on November 02, 2010 had directed both
the DDA and the DTC to vacate the river bed and to ensure the removal of all the constructions
carried out in the past. Even the Shunglu Committee which was set up to go into the conduct of
Commonwealth Games-2010 had adversely commended upon the construction of the said structure
and in its report by observing as under:- “All clearances were provided by the Lieutenant Governor
for construction of a 'temporary' structure which was ostensibly to be dismantled after the
conclusion of the Games. But this Project was implemented by the Transport Department, GNCTD
and DTC right from the beginning as a 'permanent' structure. It appears as if the hosting of CWG
provided a pretext for 'land grab' by various Government agencies after short circuiting the
established rules and procedures.” In its affidavit filed by the DUAC, it also categorically mentioned
Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi And Anr vs Anand Arya And Ors on 5 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/193337711/
2
that no proposal regarding the alleged construction was ever referred to the DUAC at any time and
no sanction or approval was thus obtained. It was also mentioned that site was inspected by the
DUAC and thereafter matter was considered by the DUAC in its meeting held on November 10,
2010.
In nutshell, the case set up by the respondents was that the construction of Bus Depot is contrary to
Master Plan; it would affect the ecology and environment of the area; by ignoring the same the
appellants were violating the principle of Puyblic Trust, principle of Sustainable Development,
Polluter Pays Principle, Principle of Inter-Generational Equity; and all this amounted to infuriation
of Articles 21, 48A, 51A of the Constitution.
The DTC and Delhi Government filed their respective affidavits explaining that the land in question
was allotted for the development of a Bus Deport to be used during the Commonwealth Games
which where to be held in New Delhi in October, 2010. The position taken by the DTC was that it
was imperative to have such a bus depot which was utilised for operating buses in the city of Delhi
and almost 900 buses were providing services from this Depot which was serving major bus
terminals. Since it was serving public purpose, there was necessity for such a depot. At the same
time, DTC also accepted the position that as per Master Plan, the area was shown as river bed and
no such construction could be carried our on river bed. In view of such a situation, it was stated in
the affidavit that the DTC vide letter dated November 09, 2010 had requested the DDA for change of
land use.
The public purpose was highlighted by stating that the Millennium Park Bus Parking acts as a life
line for nearly one fourth of the bus commuters of Delhi. It caters to approximately ten lakhs people
every day and is immensely beneficial to lower and middle class sections of society who cannot
afford a means of transport other than public bus service. Shutting down the Millennium Park Bus
Parking would deprive lakhs of people of cheap and convenient bus service and would render jobless
nearly 2,000 employees of the DTC such a drivers, conductors, mechanics, etc. The DTC also denied
that there is a construction on the flood plains of Yamuna River. As per the DTC, the Millennium
Park Bus is situated at a suitable distance from the river bund. It was submitted that before
development of the said land into a bus depot, the same was used by the Indraprastha Thermal
Power Plant for dumping of residual fly-ash. Almost 20 meters of fly-ash spared over many acres
were leveled, compacted and covered with granular sub base to enable the ground to bear the 13.5
ton weight of each Low Floor Bus. Incidentally, a high tension electricity transmission tower-which
is an essential part of the infrastructural needs of the city, is situated right in the center of this area.
The DTC also sought to project that no commercial activity to the detriment of the ecological
balance of the said land or the Yamuna River is taking place as a result of the operation of the bus
depot. It emphasized that the DTC had spent an amount of approximately ?100 crores on the
development of this infrastructure.
An additional affidavit was filed by the DTC giving certain material to support its contention that the
scientific study conducted by an expert body like NEERI recommended the area in question for
usage as parking space.
Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi And Anr vs Anand Arya And Ors on 5 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/193337711/
3
After taking note of the respective stand of the parties the High Court went into the question as to
whether the aforesaid Bus Depot could be constructed at the given site. It was found that since there
was no dispute that as per MPD-2021 the land use of the site was shown as “River Water Body” on
which construction of the type carried out by the DTC was impermissible as law mandates
construction in conformity with the Master Plan. Because of this reason the High Court disposed of
the writ petition by giving six months' time to the appellants to get the Master Plan amended, if it
was possible in law.
The flavour of the said order and the manner in which the writ petition was disposed of can be gazed
from paras 17 to 19 thereof, which we reproduce hereunder for sake of clarity:
“17. The moot question, however, is as to whether this Bus Depot could be constructed at the given
site? The petitioners have sought to demonstrate that the construction is carried out at the place
which forms part of flood plains/river built (sic - bed) and this id denied by the DTC/Government of
NCT of Delhi. On the other hand, the respondents argue that it is not a river bed and having regard
to previous user of the site for fly-ash for last number of years, use thereof as bus depot is
appropriate, it is in public interest and no other suitable site is available or at least identified by
DDA so far. We are, however, of the view that it may not be necessary even to go into these
questions. The stark reality is that as per MPD-2021 the land use of the site is “River Water Body”.
Admittedly, any construction has to be in conformity with the Master Plan. May be for this reason,
when the land was allotted to the DTC to take care of the need of Commonwealth Games, it was for
the purpose of 'temporary' parking, that too, in view of the security threat perceptions prevailing in
the region. The Government was conscious of the fact that there cannot be a permanent Bus Depot
without amendment of the Master Plan, 2021. It is for this reason, even during the argument, Mr.
Waziri made a submission that the Government was planning to make modification in the Master
Plan.
18. In view of the above, we are of the opinion that these petitions can be disposed of by permitting
the respondents to take steps for amendment in the Master Plan, as per law, if it is permissible.
There is a specific procedure for effecting the change in the Master Plan which includes notice to the
public at large and inviting objections. Once this procedure is followed and objections are invited, it
would be open to the petitioners to file their objections and raise issue of ecology and environment
which will have to be considered. Thus, arguments raised before us by the petitioners in this behalf
can be duly taken into consideration at that stage. Naturally, if there is any substance in the
contention of the petitioners, it may not result change in the Master Plan. On the other hand, at that
stage it will also be open to the respondents, particularly DTC, to put forth its case that the site in
question was used as fly-ash purposes since 1960s and on the construction of bund, the area was
segregated and, therefore, it is not going to have any impact on river built/flood plains. What we are
emphasizing is that the respective contentions on this aspect can be considered and looked into and
decision thereupon taken.
19. These petitions are accordingly disposed of by granting six months time to the respondents to
take steps for the change in the Master Plan, if it is possible, thereby changing the land user and
bringing it in conformity with the present use. In case, the Master Plan is amended in this manner,
Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi And Anr vs Anand Arya And Ors on 5 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/193337711/
4
the natural consequence thereof would be that the Bus Depot would continue to operate from the
given site. On the other hand, if attempt to amend the Master Plan fails, there would be no option to
re- locate the Bus Depot to some other place. In that event, it will be for the DTC to ask the DDA to
allot alternate site and feasibility of site at Mayur Vihar can also be considered at that stage.”
Following aspects are discernible from the aforesaid order:
(a) The construction of Millennium Bus Depot is on the land, which according to MPD-2021 is
shown as 'River Water Body'.
(b) Position in law is clear, on which there is no dispute, that any construction has to be in
conformity with the Master Plan.
(c) If the land use of the site in question is 'River Water Body' as per MPD-2021, construction
thereupon is not permissible and such area cannot be used as Bus Depot.
(d) The DTC, however, contended that land site was wrongly shown as 'River Water Body' in the
MPD 2021 as it was actually not so. It contended that the previous user of the site was for fly-ash
and the argument of the appellants in the High Court was that it was not a river bed and, therefore,
same could be used as Bus Depot, which user was in public interest. The respondents herein, on the
other hand, contended that the user of the site as Bus Depot was a threat to ecology and
environment.
(e) Since as per the MPD-2021, the land use of the site is 'River Water Body', on which construction
was not permissible without amendment of the Master Plan, the appellants conceded that in order
to continue the Bus Depot, amendment in the Master Plan was needed.
Keeping in mind the aforesaid aspects, the High Court granted six months time to the authorities to
take steps for change in the Master Plan, if it was possible in law, thereby changing the land user
and bringing it in conformity with the present use. It was pointed out that the procedure that has to
be followed for change of Master Plan included giving opportunity to the respondents herein to file
their objections and raise the issue of ecology and environment and for DTC to put forth its case that
the site in question was used as fly-ash purposes since 1960 and on construction of the Bund the
area was segregated and, therefore, use of site as Bus Depot was not going to have any impact on the
river bed/flood plains. The purpose was, thus, to give an opportunity to the appellants to establish
that area could not be treated as 'river bed' and if that is proved, it could pave way for change of
MPD 2021.
There is no amendment in the MPD-2021 till date on the aforesaid aspect and as per the said Master
Plan, land use remains the same, which has not been altered. The DTC has its own explanation as it
is contended that though steps were taken by the DDA to change the land use, but it was taking time
because of the dispute that had arisen between DDA and the Land and Development Office (L&DO)
about the ownership of the land in question. Be as it may, the Master Plan remains unaltered.
Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi And Anr vs Anand Arya And Ors on 5 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/193337711/
5
Since time of six months granted by the High Court expired and the consequence thereof was that as
per the directions contained in the order dated 13.09.2012 the appellants had to relocate the Bus
Depot to some other place, and the same was not done, the respondents herein filed Contempt
Petition No. 474 of 2013 in Writ Petition No. 5481 of 2011. Some significant developments which
took place in the Contempt Petition need to be mentioned at this stage.
On receiving the notice of contempt, in which Chairman-cum- Managing Director (CMD) of DTC
was impleaded as respondent/ contemnor, the CMD filed an affidavit dated 23.01.2014 on behalf of
the DTC wherein undertaking was given to the Court to vacate the site in question on or before
31.10.2014. It was also mentioned by the DTC in the affidavit that the problem could be solved by
the DDA with the allotment of alternate land. Since the officials of the DDA was also impleaded as a
contemnor in the said Contempt Petition, they filed periodic Status Reports in respect of allotment
of land. The ultimate result was that the DDA allotted 8.25 acres of additional land at Sarai Kale
Khan, 10 acres of land at Narela, 16.33 acres of land at Anand Vihar and 20 acres of land at Rohini
Phase-V. The stand of the DTC was that some portion of the land allotted by the DDA had been
encroached upon illegally and the land use had also not been changed because of which the DTC was
unable to shift.
In the meantime, the application for extension of time was filed, as aforesaid, which was pending
consideration by the Division Bench of the High Court and because of this reason, the Contempt
Petition was adjourned from time to time to await the result of the said application.
When the Division Bench dismissed the application for extension of time vide impugned order dated
20.10.2015, the Contempt Petition was taken up by the learned Single Judge of the High Court and
taking note of the said dismissal, the High Court pointed out that the DTC had to forthwith comply
with the order dated 13.09.2012. As on that date, the DTC informed the Court that 500 out of 800
buses that were being parked at the Millennium Bus Depot had already been shifted to other Bus
Depots. In this scenario, the Court granted the DTC two months further time, i.e. till 27.01.2016, to
vacate the Bus Depot by shifting remaining buses as well to some other Depots.
The position that emerges from the aforesaid events can be summed up as under:
Though an opportunity was granted by the High Court to the appellants to have the MPD-2021
amended, if the same was possible, and the time of six months was granted for this purpose, even
when almost four and a half years have passed, there is no amendment in the Master Plan. In the
absence of said amendment, the legal position is that Millennium Bus Depot at the given site cannot
operate. In the Contempt Petition, undertaking was given by the DTC to vacate the Bus Depot by
31.10.2014. That undertaking is not adhered to. No doubt, application for extension of time was
pending and because of this reason the Contempt Petition was adjourned from time to time, but the
said application for extension has been dismissed taking note of the fact that the appellants have
failed to get the Master Plan amended. In the impugned order, while dismissing the said application,
the High Court has taken note of the circumstances because of which there is no amendment to the
Master Plan.
Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi And Anr vs Anand Arya And Ors on 5 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/193337711/
6
Another material fact which is to be noticed is that in respect of this very issue, there was a meeting
held under the Chairmanship of the Chief Minister of Government of NCT of Delhi on 15.01.2014
wherein the background of the development of the Millennium Bus Depot was explained by the
Chief Secretary. After understanding this background, the Chief Minister pointed out the urgent
need to protect the land along the riverbed of the river Yamuna to increase recharge and to
supplement the water needs of the city of Delhi. He was, therefore, of the view that DTC should
vacate the land in question and move its buses to some alternate location and the same be done in a
time bound manner. As the Minutes of the said meeting reflect, the demand of the Chairman of the
DTC was that the DDA should immediately provide alternate land for relocating thousand buses
which are parked and maintained at the said Depot. It was explained that if no alternate site is
immediately made available, the DTC will face great difficulty in parking its fleet as there are huge
constraints in its existing depots for the fleet in question. DTC even gave the explanation by
submitting that it had got the Environmental Impact Assessment from WAPCOS (a Government of
India body under the Ministry of Water Resources) and it was committed to following the said
Report in all respects. It also mentioned that the DTC was making efforts in creating greenery in the
area and setting up of effluent treatment plants. Significantly, notwithstanding the above, the Chief
Minister expressed that DTC should relocate to some other place. The entire discussion thereof
proceeded on the alternate land to be allotted by the DDA to the DTC.
If only the aforesaid features are to be kept in mind, there is hardly any reason to interfere with the
order passed by the High Court. In fact, Mr. Shanti Bhushan and Mr. Jayant Bhushan, learned
senior counsel appearing for the respondents, on the other hand, submitted that the aforesaid
circumstances, as pointed out by the appellants, had no bearing on the issue and having regard to
the solemn undertaking given by the DTC in its affidavit to shift the Bus Depot by 31.10.2014, which
had already been flouted, and the DTC was in clear contempt, no further chance should be given to
the appellants in this behalf.
Notwithstanding the above position, Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned senior counsel appearing for the
DTC, and Dr. Rajeev Dhawan, learned senior counsel appearing for the Govt. of NCT of Delhi, made
a passionate plea for grant of some more time as according to them there was still a possibility of
amending the Master Plan suitably in near future. Such a plea was predicated on the developments
which have taken place after the passing of the impugned order. Explaining the position, it was
submitted that no amendment in MPD 2021 would be carried out earlier because of the following
three hurdles:
1)    L&DO land ownership issue.
2)    Yamuna Standing Committee approval.
3)    Foresh Department approval.
Mr. Venugopal submitted that on all three fronts, the ground realities had undergone a total change.
It was pointed out that even when L&DO had raised the issue of land ownership, it had in principle
accepted to grant No Objection Certificate for the retention of DTC Bus Depot. Even Yamuna
Standing Committee had granted its approval in principle, which was evident from the Minutes of
the Meeting held on 17.09.2013 and 04.10.2013. Likewise, Forest Department approval was under
consideration, which was clear from the correspondence that was exchanged in this behalf and it
Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi And Anr vs Anand Arya And Ors on 5 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/193337711/
7
was explained that no prior environment clearance was needed in this case as the built up area in
the complex is less than 20,000 sq.mts. The learned counsel also referred to the minutes of the
meeting held under the Chairmanship of A.S. (UD) in the Ministry of Urban Development, on
17.10.2015 wherein following was agreed:
(i) DDA will take immediate steps, possibly within a period of one month, for demarcation of 'O'
zone area after collecting the required statistics from the Irrigation & Flood Control Department of
GNCTD.
(ii) MD, DTC will actively coordinate with DDA for facilitating collecting the data and also in
whatever way possible for conducting the demarcation of 'O' zone and also approaching the
Principal Committee for its permission.
(iii) Once the required permission from the Principal Committee is available and the court cases are
disposed of, L&DO will take necessary action for issuing the required NOC for land use for the Bus
Depot.
It was submitted that Minutes of the said Meeting were prepared only on 28.10.2015 and, therefore,
could not be placed before the High Court when the matter was taken up on 20.10.2015 and
impugned order passed.
Another significant development which was pointed out was the order dated 13.01.2015 of the
National Green Tribunal passed in OA No. 6/2012 and MA Nos. 967/2013 and 275/2014 in the
matter of Manoj Mishra v. Union of India & Ors. That case pertains to cleaning of River Yamuna. In
the aforesaid order, after comprehensively reviewing the situation in the light of various technical
reports etc., the Tribunal has given some directions which, inter alia, include the direction to all
concerned authorities, including the DDA, Municipal Corporations and the Govt. of NCT of Delhi, to
take immediate and effective steps for identification of floodplain. The Tribunal has directed
preparation of a map in this regard and physically demarcate the entire floodplain. There is also a
direction to the Principal Committee to identify which structures were to be demolished and which
ones were to be retained, in the interest of ecology and environment. The public interest in retaining
the said Bus Depot was again emphasized and it was submitted that once the aforesaid exercise of
demarcation of the entire floodplain is carried out by the Principal Committee, the stand of the
appellants would be vindicated that the area in question where the Bus Depot has been constructed
does not fall within the floodplain thereby paving way for the amendment of the Master Plan.
We have considered the respected submissions of learned counsel for the parties on either side. As is
clear from the tenure and spirit behind the orders dated 13.09.2012 passed by the High Court, the
chance was given to the appellants to have the MPD 2021 amended if it was permissible in law and
the period of six months was given for this purpose. This was done by the High Court keeping in
view the submission of the appellants herein that the Bus Depot in question was constructed to
serve greater public purpose; the area in question was, as a matter of fact, was not falling on the
river bed; and there was no threat to environment or ecology in having the Bus Depot at the given
site. Exercise to consider the aforesaid aspect has not taken place, or for some reason or the other,
Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi And Anr vs Anand Arya And Ors on 5 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/193337711/
8
whether it was because of dispute between L&DO and DDA on the issue of land ownership or
otherwise. However, the development which have taken place in recent times, particularly the
orders of the National Green Tribunal, point out to the fact that things are started moving and it
would be known in near future as a result of study conducted by the Expert Committee, whether
area in question where the Bus Depot stands, is viable for this purpose or not, directing the DTC to
demolish the Bus Depot at this juncture may not be appropriate and the decision in this regard can
be deferred for some time to await the outcome of the report of the identification of floodplain.
Accordingly, we dispose of these appeals by granting one year time to the DTC during which period
the DTC shall either get the MPD 2021 amended, failing which it shall shift the Depot in question.
We make it clear that no further time on any ground whatsoever shall be granted in this behalf.
….......................................CJI.
(T.S.THAKUR) .............................................J.
(A.K. SIKRI) .............................................J.
(R. BANUMATHI) NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 05, 2016.
Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi And Anr vs Anand Arya And Ors on 5 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/193337711/
9
