Supreme Court of India
Hamant Yashwant Dhage vs State Of Maharashtra & Ors on 10 February, 2016
Author: S K Singh
Bench: M.Y. Eqbal, Shiva Kirti Singh
                                                                              REPORTABLE
                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 110 OF 2016
       (Arising out of Special Leave Petition(Crl.) No. 3251 of 2012)
|HAMANT YASHWANT DHAGE                                 |Appellant(s)        |
                    Versus
|STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND OTHERS                       |Respondent(s)       |
                            O R D E R
SHIVA KIRTI SINGH, J.
1. We have heard learned counsel for the parties at some length.
2. Leave granted.
3. Though the matter has remained pending for long, fortunately the core issue involved for our
consideration is a very simple one.
4. The appellant was respondent in two Criminal Appeals bearing Numbers 766 and 767 of 2010
arising out of a common judgment of the High Court of Bombay dated September 8, 2009 in
CRL.W.P. No. 2482 of 2008.
5. This Court disposed of both the appeals vide order dated April 12, 2010. It did not approve the
action of High Court in entertaining writ petitions for change of investigating officer. The relevant
parts of that order read as follows :-
“We are of the opinion that if the High Courts entertain such writ petitions, then they will be flooded
with such writ petitions and will not be able to do any other work except dealing with such writ
petitions. Hence, we have held that the complainant must avail of his alternate remedy to approach
the concerned Magistrate under Section 156(3), Cr.P.C. and if he does so, the Magistrate will ensure,
if prima facie he is satisfied, registration of the first information report and also ensure a proper
investigation in the matter, and he can also monitor the investigation.
Hamant Yashwant Dhage vs State Of Maharashtra & Ors on 10 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163613503/
1
In view of the settled position in Sakiri Vasu's (supra), the impugned judgment of the High Court
cannot be sustained and is hereby set aside. The concerned Magistrate is directed to ensure proper
investigation into the alleged offence under Section 156(3), Cr.P.C. and if he deems it necessary he
can also recommend to the S.S.P./S.P. concerned change of the investigation officer, so that a proper
investigation is done. The Magistrate can also monitor the investigation, though he cannot himself
investigate (as investigation is the job of the police. Parties may produce any material they wish
before the concerned Magistrate. The learned Magistrate shall be uninfluenced by any observation
in the impugned order of the High court.
The appeals are allowed in the above terms.
In view of the aforesaid order, no orders need be passed on the application for intervention and it is
disposed of accordingly.”
6. The appellant, in the capacity of complainant, approached the learned Judicial Magistrate F.C.
Court No.2, Pune who took notice of this Court's order and issued several directions in RCC No.
0402459/2008 as is evident from its order dated February 17, 2011, including relevant directions to
the investigating officer. But unfortunately the learned Judicial Magistrate came to a wrong
conclusion that in the absence of any specific direction of this Court, the prayer of the complainant
for registration of F.I.R. had to be rejected. The complainant then approached the High Court of
Bombay through Criminal Writ Petition No. 3009 of 2011 which was disposed of by the impugned
order dated February 13, 2012. The High Court declined to issue a direction for registering an F.I.R.
by taking the view that it was open for the petitioner to seek clarification/modification of the order
from the apex Court.
7. Mr. Ram Jethmalani, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant argued with
vigor that investigation into a serious case has been unnecessarily delayed at the instance of vested
interests and hence this Court should now take a strong view and in the light of earlier order dated
April 12, 2010, the police should be directed to treat the pending case as a police case in view of
implications arising from Section 156(3) of the Criminal Procedure Code (in short 'the Code'). He
further submitted that without wasting much time, the police should conduct a thorough
investigation and complete the same within a reasonable time period such as six months and submit
its final views to the learned Magistrate through a proper report.
8. Mr. P. Chidambaram, learned senior counsel appearing for private respondents did not oppose
the aforesaid prayer. In fact, according to his submissions, the police could be asked to complete the
investigation even in a shorter span of time and submit its final views to the Magistrate without
wasting time on the formality of registration of F.I.R.
9. Mr. Arvind Sawant, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the State of Maharashtra has
drawn our attention to copies of various reports submitted by the investigating officer. He expressed
his concurrence with the view that police may be directed to submit its final opinion in the matter
through an appropriate report within a reasonable time.
Hamant Yashwant Dhage vs State Of Maharashtra & Ors on 10 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163613503/
2
10. In view of the aforesaid broad consensus amongst the counsel for the various parties, it is not
necessary for us to go deeper into the relevant issue of law as to whether the earlier order of this
Court dated April 12,2010 warranted registering of F.I.R. by the police before commencing
investigation. But we would like to only indicate in brief the law on this subject expressly stated by
this Court in the case of Mohd. Yousuf versus Afaq Jahan (Smt.) and another, (2006) 1 SCC 627.
This Court explained that registration of an F.I.R. involves only the process of recording the
substance of information relating to commission of any cognizable offence in a book kept by the
officer incharge of the concerned police station. In paragraph 11 of the aforementioned case, the law
was further elucidated by pointing out that to enable the police to start investigation, it is open to
the Magistrate to direct the police to register an F.I.R. and even where a Magistrate does not do so in
explicit words but directs for investigation under Section 156(3) of the Code, the police should
register an F.I.R. Because Section 156 falls within chapter XII of the Code which deals with powers
of the police officers to investigate cognizable offences, the police officer concerned would always be
in a better position to take further steps contemplated in Chapter XII once F.I.R. is registered in
respect of the concerned cognizable offence.
11. In our considered view, the same was the import of this Court's order passed on April 12, 2010.
In the light of the said earlier order; the legal position noticed above and the stand of the parties, we
have no difficulty in directing the concerned Magistrate and the police officer to rectify their mistake
by ensuring registration of an appropriate F.I.R. The delay in lodging of such F.I.R. occurring after
April 12, 2010 shall not have any effect on the investigation already carried out by the investigating
officer(s). We also direct the police to complete the investigation fairly and in accordance with law at
an early date, preferably within six months. On receipt of appropriate report from the police on
conclusion of investigation, the learned Magistrate will deal with the matter strictly in accordance
with law on the basis of materials available on record without being influenced by orders passed by
different Courts.
12. The appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent.
.......................J.
(M.Y. EQBAL) .......................J.
(SHIVA KIRTI SINGH) New Delhi, February 10, 2016
Hamant Yashwant Dhage vs State Of Maharashtra & Ors on 10 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163613503/
3
