Supreme Court of India
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Author: M.R. Shah
Bench: M.R. Shah, C.T. Ravikumar
                                                                    REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1581 OF 2021
                         Kailash Vijayvargiya                       …Appellant
                                                    Versus
                         Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri and others            …Respondents
                                                    WITH
                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1582 OF 2021
                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1583 OF 2021
                                            JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order dated 01.10.2021
passed by the High Court of Calcutta in Criminal Revision Application No. 92/2021, by which the
High Court has Signature Not Verified allowed the said revision application preferred by Digitally
signed by R Natarajan Date: 2023.05.04 16:38:36 IST Reason:
respondent no.1 herein – original complainant (victim) and has quashed and set aside order dated
12.11.2020 passed by the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Alipore (for short, ‘learned CJM’)
rejecting the petition filed by respondent no.1 herein – original complainant under Section 156(3) of
the Code of Criminal Procedure,1973 (Code/Cr.PC) original respondent nos. 2 to 4 (alleged accused)
have preferred the present appeals.
2. The facts leading the present appeals in a nutshell are as under:
That respondent no.1 herein – original complainant lodged a complaint under Section 156(3)
Cr.P.C. in the Court of learned CJM, making allegations against the appellants herein alleging that
she was raped by all the three appellants on 29.11.2018 at about 5:00 p.m. at the residence of
original accused no.3 – Kailash Vijayvargiya, when she was invited to discuss another Crime No. 1 of
2018 registered against their colleagues filed by her. That it was prayed to direct the Officer in
Charge of Bhowanipore Police Station to start investigation into the matter after treating the
complaint as an FIR.
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
1
2.1 It was the case on behalf of the complainant in the complaint before the learned CJM that she
was a member of the State Committee of the Bhartiya Janata Party in the State of West Bengal. As a
person involved in active politics, she has acquaintance with the leaders of the State at national
level. On the allegation of rape, she filed a written complaint before the Officer in Charge, Behala
(Woman) Police Station against one Amalendu Chattopadhyay. The said complaint was registered as
Case No. 01/2018 dated 31/08/2018 under Sections 417/376/406/313/120B IPC. The investigation
of the said case resulted in filing of the charge sheet against the above-named Amalendu
Chattopadhyay. It was further alleged that since the filing of the charge sheet, she was pressurised
by the appellants, namely, Pradeep Joshi, Jishnu Basu and Kailash Vijayvargiya, national level
leaders of the said party to withdraw the case against Amalendu Chattopadhyay. On the pretext of
having a discussion over the said matter, the appellants asked her to come at the residential
apartment of accused – Kailash Vijayvargiya. It was further alleged in the complaint that she tried to
inform the matter to the Officer in Charge of the Bhowanipore Police Station but the police
suggested her to meet them in response to such call.
That she went to the residential apartment of the accused – Kailash Vijayvargiya on 29.11.2018 at
about 5:00 p.m. The other accused were present in the said apartment from before. It was further
alleged that the appellants committed rape upon her against her will one by one. Therefore, it was
alleged that she became the victim of libido of the leaders of the said political party occupying
position at national level. It was further alleged in the complaint that after the incident she was
threatened with dire consequences. She was threatened by the appellants that in the event she takes
any legal steps against them, her son would also be killed. It was further alleged that subsequently
also she was subjected to physical assault and mental torture and she lodged complaints against the
accused before different police stations, such as, Sarsuna P.S. Case No. 131/2019 under Sections
341/506(ii)/34 IPC and Bolpur P.S. Case No. 89/2020 under Sections 341/323/325/506/34 IPC. It
was further alleged and so stated in the complaint that over the incident dated 29.11.2018, she tried
to make the complaint with the local police station but police refused to accept such complaint from
her. She also informed the matter to the higher authorities of the police but they also failed to take
any action against the accused by registering an FIR. It appears that the respondent informed the
Officer in Charge of Behala Police Station on 14.08.2020 about the alleged rape by the accused
persons allegedly on 9.8.2018.
2.2 She filed a complaint before the DCP (South Division), 34, Park Street, Kolkata on 5.10.2020.
According to her, she filed a written complaint before the concerned police station, i.e., P.S.
Bhowanipore on 27.10.2020. She filed another complaint to the Deputy Commissioner of Police on
04.11.2020. According to the complainant, despite the aforesaid complaints to the various
authorities making specific allegations against the accused persons having committed a rape upon
her on 29.11.2018, FIR has not been lodged and no investigation has been carried out and therefore
she filed an application in the Court of the learned CJM, Alipore under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. on
12.11.2020 and requested to direct the concerned police officer to register an FIR and investigate
into the matter.
2.3 That the learned CJM, by a detailed order dated 12.11.2020 and after giving cogent reasons,
dismissed the said application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C.
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
2
2.4 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the order passed by the learned CJM, dismissing the
application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. filed by the complainant, the complainant preferred
Revision Application before the High Court being Criminal Revision Application No. 92/2021. By
the impugned judgment and order, the High Court has allowed the said revision application and has
quashed and set aside order dated 12.11.2020 passed by the learned CJM, dismissing the application
under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C., mainly relying upon the decision of this Court in the case of Lalita
Kumari v. Government of Uttar Pradesh and others, reported in (2014) 2 SCC 1 and holding that as
held by this Court in the case of Lalita Kumari (supra), the police authority in case of preliminary
inquiry prior to the registration of a case concerning cognizable offence, has no jurisdiction to verify
the veracity of the allegations and therefore a Magistrate cannot verify the truth and veracity of the
allegations contained in the application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. and therefore the learned CJM
acted contrary to the law laid down by this Court in the case of Lalita Kumari (supra), while entering
into the truth and veracity of the allegations. It has been further held that the learned CJM ought
not to have dismissed the application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. on the ground that there was a
delay of two years in lodging the complaint, which aspect can be considered only at the time of trial.
2.5 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order passed by the High
Court, quashing and setting aside the order passed by the learned CJM dated 12.11.2020 dismissing
the application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. and remanding the matter to the learned CJM to
reconsider the application filed by the complainant under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. in light of the
observations made in the impugned judgment and order and pass a reasoned order, the original
respondents – alleged accused have preferred the present appeals.
3. S/Shri Mahesh Jethmalani, Maninder Singh and P.S. Patwalia, learned Senior Advocates have
appeared on behalf of the respective appellants. Shri R. Basant, learned Senior Advocate has
appeared on behalf of the State of West Bengal and Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharya, learned
Senior Advocate has appeared on behalf of the original complainant.
3.1 Learned Senior Advocate Shri Mahesh Jethmalani appearing on behalf of one of the
appellants-accused has vehemently submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the case, the
High Court has committed a grave error in quashing and setting aside the well-reasoned order
passed by the learned CJM dismissing the complaint under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C.
3.2 It is submitted that the High Court ought to have appreciated that the learned CJM dismissed
the application under section 156(3) Cr.P.C. upon verifying the truth and veracity of the allegations
made in the application, more particularly considering the fact that there was a delay of almost two
years after the date of the alleged incident which has not been explained. It is submitted that
therefore the learned CJM was well within its jurisdiction to verify the truth and veracity of the
allegations made in the application when such serious allegations were made after a period of
almost two years after the date of the alleged incident and that in between though number of other
complaints were filed against the accused and others, at no point of time, any allegation of rape on
29.11.2018 was made.
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
3
3.3 It is submitted that while passing the impugned judgment and order and quashing and setting
aside the order passed by the learned CJM, the High Court has wrongly relied upon and/or
considered and/or applied the decision of this Court in the case of Lalita Kumari (supra).
3.4 It is submitted that the High Court has materially erred in observing that while considering the
application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C., Magistrate has no jurisdiction at all to verify the truth and
veracity of the allegations.
3.5 It is submitted that the observations made by the High Court in the impugned judgment and
order that while considering the application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C., Magistrate has no
jurisdiction to even prima facie verify the truth and veracity of the allegations made in the
application are just contrary to the law laid down by this Court in the case of Priyanka Srivastava v.
State of Uttar Pradesh, reported in (2015) 6 SCC 287. It is submitted that the same is also contrary
to the decision of the co-ordinate Bench of the Calcutta High Court in the case of Mukul Roy v. The
State of West Bengal, 2018 SCC Online Cal. 4861, expressly following the judgment in Priyanka
Srivastava (supra).
3.6 Learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellants have also heavily relied upon the
decisions of this Court in the cases of Maksud Saiyed v. State of Gujarat, reported in (2008) 5 SCC
668; Anil Kumar v. M.K. Aiyappa, reported in (2013) 10 SCC 705; and Ramdev Food Products
Private Limited v. State of Gujarat, reported in (2015) 6 SCC 439 and decision of this Court in the
case of Suresh Kankra v. State of U.P. & another (Criminal Appeal No. 52/2022, decided on
07.01.2022), in support of their submission that the Magistrate was well within its jurisdiction to
verify the truth and veracity of the allegations made in the application, more particularly when such
a serious allegation of rape was made after a period of two years after the date of the alleged
incident.
3.7 It is further submitted that the learned Single Judge of the High Court is not right and/or
justified in taking a contrary view than the view taken by the co-ordinate Bench in the case of Mukul
Roy (supra). It is submitted that if the learned Single Judge of the High Court was of the opinion
that the view taken in the case of Mukul Roy (supra) is not a correct law, in that case, propriety
demands that the learned Single Judge ought to have referred the matter to the larger Bench, rather
than taking a contrary view.
3.8 It is submitted that even otherwise the learned Single Judge ought to have appreciated that the
decision of the High Court in the case of Mukul Roy (supra) was expressly following the judgment of
this Hon’ble Court in the case of Priyanka Srivastava (supra). It is submitted that therefore also, the
learned Single Judge ought not to have taken a contrary view.
3.9 It is further submitted by the learned Senior Advocates appearing on behalf of the appellants
that in the present case even the SHO after receiving the complaint in the month of October, 2020
conducted a preliminary enquiry as per the law laid down by this Court in the case of Lalita Kumari
(supra) and thereafter refused to register the FIR.
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
4
3.10 Learned Senior Advocates appearing on behalf of the respective appellants have taken us to the
number of emails and messages sent to one of the appellants – Kailash Vijayvargiya from
30.11.2018, i.e., the next day after the alleged incident up till March, 2020. It is submitted that if he
had committed the rape on 29.11.2018, as alleged, in that case, subsequently there was no reason for
her to send emails and messages to the appellant – Kailash Vijayvargiya.
3.11 It is further submitted that in between 29.11.2018 and October, 2020, the complainant filed
various complaints before various police stations against the very accused. The first complaint was
filed on 12.12.2019 (Sarsuna case). The said complaint categorically mentions that she met the
appellant, however, complaint does not make any mention of the alleged incident of rape. It is
submitted that in the said FIR, the only allegations were that she was called by the top-level leaders
for 4 times in the last year, November 2018 and each time they locked her for 4 to 5 hours and
pressurised her to withdraw the case. It is submitted that the said FIR was registered as FIR No.
131/2019. It is submitted that the said case has been closed now, as a closure report dated
16.06.2020 was filed in the aforesaid case.
3.12 It is submitted that thereafter one another complaint dated 6.2.2020 was filed, however, there
was no mention of any particular date of the alleged rape incident. It is submitted that thereafter
one another complaint was filed on 12.03.2020 wherein she did not mention about the alleged rape
incident at all. It is submitted that after a period of two years of alleged incident of rape, the
complainant filed a complaint dated 27.10.2020 in which for the first time she stated that in order to
pressurise her to withdraw the 2018 case against Amalendu Chattopadhyay, the appellants called
her at the apartment of appellant no.1 – Kailash Vijayvargiya and raped her on 29.11.2018. It is
submitted that therefore the learned CJM rightly observed that as there was an unexplained and
inordinate delay of two years in making the complaint against the alleged offence, it casts doubt
regarding the truth and veracity of the allegations contained in the application under Section 156(3)
Cr.P.C.
3.13 It is further submitted by the learned Senior Advocates appearing for the respective appellants
that while passing order dated 12.11.2020, the learned CJM made some pertinent observations to
highlight that there was an inordinate delay in making the first police complaint against the alleged
offence and that there existed sufficient inconsistencies to raise doubts regarding the truth and
veracity of the allegations contained in the application under Section 156(3). It is submitted that
firstly, the learned CJM observed that according to the complainant the alleged offence took place
on 29.11.2018, however, attempt to initiate criminal proceedings was made for the first time only on
27.10.2020 – the date when a complaint was lodged at the Bhowanipore Police Station. This was
after a gap of about two years from the date of the alleged offence.
3.14 It is submitted that thereafter the learned CJM further noted that the complainant in her
application under Section 156(3) has stated that she made several complaints before various police
stations against the accused persons and their men for the physical attacks carried out on her,
however, no such complaint finds mention of the alleged offence of rape. Therefore, the learned
CJM noted that possibility of false implication cannot be ruled out, especially when the same
complainant made several other complaints against the same accused in that period in which no
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
5
allegation of rape on 29.11.2018 was made.
3.15 It is further submitted that the learned CJM also further observed that the complainant in her
complaint to Behala Police Station dated 14.08.2020 had accused one of the appellants – Kailash
Vijayvargiya of raping her at Hotel Peerless Inn on 09.08.2018, however, the learned CJM did not
find any mention of such incident in her application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C.. The learned CJM
further observed that Behala Police Station Case No. 01/2018 against Amalendu Chattopadhyay and
others was filed on 31.08.2018, that was much after the alleged rape by Kailash Vijayvargiya at Hotel
Peerless Inn, however, even that complaint made to the Behala Police Station finds no mention of
such incident. Therefore, considering the unexplained delay of about two years in making the
complaint along with several inconsistencies in the allegations, the learned CJM concluded that
allegations appear to be unbelievable and therefore rightly rejected Section 156(3) application of the
complainant.
3.16 It is further submitted by the learned Senior Advocates appearing on behalf of the appellants
that in the instant case, the learned CJM found the explanation for delay by the complainant wholly
unsatisfactory. It is submitted that it is no doubt true that delay is not always fatal in the case of
rape, particularly if adequately explained, however, there must be at least some credibility in the
explanation for delay. It is submitted that in the first information report for rape, a delay of almost 2
years after the date of the alleged incident is a factor that of necessity would itself put any judicial
mind on guard regarding the veracity of the complainant’s allegations. It is submitted that the
learned CJM however did not dismiss the application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. solely on the
ground of delay, but examined her conduct since the date of the alleged rape till the filing of Section
156(3) application and found that her conduct contradicted her explanation for delay. That she was
not a timid victim inasmuch as she was an experienced social/political worker; had a history of filing
FIRs including for rape; had earlier filed FIRs against the accused in the instant case for other
offences and indeed had invoked police powers against several powerful people. It is submitted that
therefore complainant is not a person who could be easily intimidated or silenced into inaction for
an act of rape committed on her. It is submitted that therefore the learned CJM committed no error
in dismissing the application under Section 156(3) which ought not to have set aside by the High
Court on wrong application of law holding that at the stage of considering the application under
Section 156(3) Cr.P.C., the Magistrate has no jurisdiction at all to consider the truth and veracity of
the allegations in the complaint/application. It is submitted that the High Court has wrongly applied
the ratio in Lalita Kumari (supra), which lays down the guidelines for the police and the
investigating officer and not applicable to a Magistrate exercising the jurisdiction under Section
156(3) Cr.P.C.
3.17 It is submitted that the High Court has observed that as held by this Court in the case of Lalita
Kumari (supra), when the police officer at the stage of registering the FIR has no jurisdiction to
verify the veracity and truth of the allegations, how a Magistrate in exercise of powers under Section
156(3) can verify the veracity of the allegations in the complaint. It is submitted that the directions
issued by this Court in the case of Lalita Kumari (supra) shall be confined to the police and shall not
be applicable to a Magistrate exercising the jurisdiction under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C.
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
6
3.18 It is further submitted that even the subsequent conduct on the part of the complainant creates
serious doubts about her credibility. It is submitted that the complainant having realised the serious
doubt that her delayed complaint casts upon the veracity of her allegations completely, before this
Court in the counter affidavit, she has stated on oath and has come out with a case now that she had
in fact lodged a complaint with the police against the alleged rape incident on 29.11.2018 by lodging
complaint on the very next day at 11:00 a.m.at the Behala Police Station. It is submitted that that
was not her case even in the application under Section 156(3) and/or even in the complaints before
the concerned police officers. It is submitted that even the learned Senior Advocate for the State of
West Bengal has informed the Court that there was no such record of the complaint being filed. It is
submitted that thus the complainant has made a false statement before this Court on oath only to
get out of delay and to get out the fact that till October, 2020, no complaint was given by her in
respect of the alleged incident of rape on 29.11.2018.
3.19 Making above submissions, it is submitted that the present case is a glaring example of abuse of
process and abuse of law. It is submitted that accusation of rape is prima facie false and
manufactured with an intent to extort or blackmail the accused on the pretext of these false
allegations. It is submitted that such a serious allegation of rape after a period of about two years
from the date of alleged incident have been made to tarnish the image of the appellants and to take a
political revenge and to finish the political career of the appellants. Therefore, it is prayed to allow
the present appeals and quash and set aside the impugned judgment and order passed by the High
Court. It is submitted that during the pendency of the present proceedings, despite the fact that the
present appeals were pending before this Court, the learned CJM has passed an order dated
08.10.2021 directing the Officer in Charge of Bhowanipore Police Station for treating the application
as an FIR and pursuant to the order of the learned CJM, FIR No. 221/2021 has been registered
against the appellants. It is submitted that the said FIR is lodged consequent to the impugned
judgment and order passed by the High Court. It is submitted that therefore if the impugned
judgment and order passed by the High Court is set aside, in that case, all subsequent consequential
orders and subsequent registration of the FIR also deserve to be quashed and set aside.
4. Shri R. Basant, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the State of West Bengal has
vehemently submitted that the Magistrate is not authorised to inquire into the credibility of the
complainant and the acceptability of the allegations at the stage of application under Section 156(3)
Cr.P.C.
4.1 It is submitted that the Constitution Bench judgment in the case of Lalita Kumari (supra) holds
that a police officer cannot refuse to register an FIR if it discloses commission of a cognizable
offence. It is submitted that the preliminary enquiry contemplated in Lalita Kumari (supra) by a
police officer is only to ascertain whether a cognizable offence is revealed or not. It is submitted that
if the police officer wrongly or incorrectly refuses to register an FIR, the complainant has no option
in law but to file a complaint under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C.
4.2 It is submitted that though the judgment in Priyanka Srivastava (supra) empowers the
Magistrate to consider the credibility of the complainant and the acceptability of the allegations also
at the stage of application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C., in view of the prior decisions of this Court in
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
7
the cases of Srinivas Gundluri and others v. SEPCO Electric Power Construction Corporation,
reported in (2010) 8 SCC 206; and Anju Chaudhary v. State of U.P., reported in (2013) 6 SCC 384,
the plea that the veracity and/or credibility of the complainant and the acceptability of the
allegations raised can be gone into by the Magistrate at Section 156(3) stage does not appear to be
correct.
4.3 It is submitted that the Magistrate is approached by the complainant alleging that the police
officer has not registered the FIR. Hence, there cannot be a mismatch between the duty of the police
officer under section 154(1) and the contours of the jurisdiction of the Magistrate under Section
156(3) at the pre-cognizance stage. It is submitted that if so understood, the test of veracity enabled
in Priyanka Srivastava (supra) can only be to ascertain whether a cognizable offence is in fact made
out or not. It cannot receive an interpretation, divorced of the context and the dictum in Lalita
Kumari (supra). If so, there will be a mismatch between Section 154(1) and Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. It
is submitted that the decision of this Court in the case of Priyanka Srivastava (supra) cannot lead to
a conclusion that the Magistrate can delve into the credibility of the complainant/witnesses and the
acceptability of the allegations made by her. It is submitted that Priyanka Srivastava (supra) was not
intended to confer such a jurisdiction.
4.4 It is further submitted that if the Magistrates were given powers to dismiss the complaint as
soon as he chooses not to make a reference under Section 156(3), it would virtually be quashing the
complaint by arriving at a premature conclusion without any evidence on record that the
complainant cannot be believed. It is submitted that this would in effect amount to the Magistrate
arrogating to himself the inherent powers conferred on the High Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C. It
is submitted that at the stage of Section 156(3), the Magistrate will not have any material which
would enable him to take a decision on the credibility of the complainant or the acceptability of the
allegations in the complaint.
4.5 It is further submitted that firstly the learned CJM could have exercised the discretion to direct
the concerned police officer to register an FIR as the complaint reveals the commission of a
cognizable offence. It is submitted that the police officer having not chosen to register an FIR, the
Magistrate if he is satisfied certainly has to refer the complaint to the police station under Section
156(3) to register an FIR. It is submitted that alternatively if the learned Magistrate chooses not to
refer the complaint to the police under Section 156(3), in any case, he could not have dismissed the
complaint and must have proceeded to the stage of Section 200/202 Cr.P.C. and take an appropriate
decision under Section 203 or 204 Cr.P.C. It is submitted that the petition made by the complainant
dated 27.10.2020 inter alia praying for action by the Magistrate to direct investigation, amounts to a
“complaint” under Section 2(d) Cr.P.C. It is submitted that therefore the Magistrate has the
discretion to decide whatever action needs to be taken in the given facts of the case, under Section
156(3) or Section 200/202 Cr.P.C.
4.6 It is submitted that therefore, resort to Section 156(3) is also “taking action under the Code” and
therefore the complaint does not cease to be a complaint because the complainant has inter alia
requested for action under Section 156(3) also. It is submitted that the jurisdiction of the Magistrate
under Section 156(3) and Sections 200/202 Cr.P.C does not depend upon the
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
8
prayer/choice/preference of the complainant. Formal requirements of filing a list of witnesses and
documents under Section 204 Cr.P.C. relate to a post-cognizance stage and the filing or non-filing of
such list cannot affect the status of the petition as a complaint under Section 2(d) Cr.P.C. It is
submitted that when presented with such a complaint, the Magistrate certainly has a discretion to
make a pre-cognizance reference under Section 156(3) or alternatively take a post-cognizance action
under Sections200/202 Cr.P.C. If a petition answers the definition of a complaint under Section
2(d), all these courses are open and available to the Magistrate. It is submitted that therefore when
the Magistrate does not choose to proceed under Section 156(3), the Magistrate cannot dismiss the
complaint merely because he finds the resort to Section 156(3) not advisable. It is submitted that the
Magistrate must still continue under Sections 200/202 Cr.P.C. and pass orders dismissing the
complaint under Section 203 Cr.P.C. or issue a process under Section 204 Cr.P.C.
5. While opposing the present appeals, Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharya, learned Senior Advocate
appearing on behalf of the original complainant has vehemently submitted that in the present case
the complaint filed by the complainant discloses commission of a cognizable offence. It is submitted
that therefore it was the duty of the concerned police officer to register an FIR and investigate into
the matter. It is submitted that however as the concerned police officer failed to register an FIR and
investigate into the matter, the Magistrate in exercise of powers under Section 156(3) has to direct
registration of an FIR and direct the concerned police officer to investigate into the allegations made
in the FIR.
5.1 It is submitted that at the stage of registering an FIR, neither the police officer nor even the
Magistrate at the stage of 156(3) have any jurisdiction and/or authority to hold a detailed
enquiry/preliminary enquiry. It is submitted that the failure of the police to comply with Sections
156(1) and 156(2) Cr.P.C. requires the Magistrate to pass an order directing such an investigation. It
is submitted that the purpose and object is to prima facie ensure that the ingredients of any
cognizable offence are satisfied.
5.2 It is submitted that as mandated by the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in the case of
Lalita Kumari (supra), the moment a complaint discloses the ingredients of any cognizable offence,
the registration of an FIR becomes mandatory and any investigation consequent thereto is to prima
facie satisfy that an offence so alleged is apparently cognizable. It is submitted that at that stage, the
only requirement is to satisfy whether the allegations made in the FIR disclose commission of a
cognizable offence or not and not beyond that.
5.3 It is further submitted by the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the original
complainant that as held by this Court in the case of Lalita Kumari (supra), reasonableness or
credibility of information is not a condition precedent for registration of an FIR. It is further
observed and held that use of word “shall” in Section 154 Cr.P.C. is a mandate to register the FIR
and the rule of literal construction would apply. It is submitted that as per the decision of this Court
in the case of Lalita Kumari (supra), only in exceptional cases, before registering the FIR, the
preliminary enquiry by the concerned police officer is held to be permissible. It is submitted that,
however, when the offence alleged is against the woman and when there are serious allegations of
rape made, there is no question of holding any further preliminary enquiry at the stage of Section
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
9
156(3) application.
5.4 It is submitted that in the case of Priyanka Srivastava (supra), in paragraphs 29 & 30, it was
observed that Magistrates were issuing process directing lodging of FIR in a stereotype and routine
manner and therefore this Court observed and held that “to curb litigants from filing frivolous
petitions, there should be prior applications under Sections 154(1) and 154(3) and that the petition
under Section 156(3) should be supported by an affidavit”. It is submitted that the observations in
paragraph 30, viz, in appropriate cases, the Magistrate could verify the truth and also verify the
veracity of the allegations has to be read with the observations in earlier paragraphs wherein it was
held that a Magistrate should take note of the allegations in entirety; the date of the incident and
whether any cognizable case is remotely made out. It is submitted that therefore reliance placed by
the learned Senior Advocates on behalf of the appellants on Priyanka Srivastava (supra) to contend
that the judgment is an authority for the proposition that a Magistrate may verify the veracity of the
allegations and thereby conduct a mini trial is wholly misplaced. It is submitted that at that stage the
preliminary judicial act is to ensure whether any cognizable offence is remotely made out/disclosed.
It is submitted that therefore decisions of this Court in the cases of Lalita Kumari (supra) and
Priyanka Srivastava (supra) have to be harmoniously construed and read.
5.5 It is further submitted that noting the rise of crime against women, the Criminal Amendment
Act (13 of 2013) was promulgated amending Section 154(1) Cr.P.C, Section 173(1A) Cr.P.C and
Section 166A, IPC. It is submitted that the procedural requirement to compulsorily register an FIR
was already existing in Section 154 Cr.P.C. but required the judicial interpretation in Lalita Kumari
(supra) to be a mandate. The insertion of section 166A to the IPC has made the non-registration of
complaint as FIR containing a cognizable offence, liable to penal consequences against the public
servant (police). It is submitted that therefore it is the duty of the police to register the FIR on the
basis of the complaint disclosing commission of a cognizable offence and non-registration of a
complaint as FIR is now offence.
5.6 It is submitted that even in complaint cases, it is only the prima facie satisfaction which is to be
recorded and the scope of enquiry under Section 202 Cr.P.C. is restricted only to finding out the
truth of the allegations in order to determine whether process should be issued or not and the
inquiry even at that stage does not partake the character of a full-dress trial which can take place
only after process is issued. Reliance is placed on paragraphs 40 & 41 of the decision of this Court in
the case of Anju Chaudhary (supra).
5.7 It is further submitted by the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the complainant
that in the present case the primary reason for not entertaining the petition under Section 156(3)
was delay. It is submitted that as held by this Court in the case of Assistant Collector of Customs,
Bombay v. L.R. Melwani, reported in AIR 1970 SC 962, the Court before which the complaint was
filed could not have thrown out the same on the sole ground that there has been delay in filing it. It
is observed that the question of delay in filing a complaint may be a circumstance to be taken into
consideration in arriving at the final verdict. But by itself it affords no ground for dismissing the
complaint. It is submitted that in the present case the complainant had given cogent and specific
reasons for the delay giving open threats to her. It is submitted that further, section 468 Cr.P.C. does
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
10
not law down the period of limitation for offences punishable with imprisonment exceeding three
years. It is submitted that therefore on the ground of delay, the application of the complainant could
not have been dismissed.
5.8 It is submitted that in the present case, the learned CJM also ought not to have opined at the
stage of 156(3) Cr.P.C. that the allegations appear to be unbelievable. It is submitted that the
application of judicial mind at this stage is limited only to the extent of causing investigation to find
out whether the offence alleged is cognizable or not and the ingredients prima facie satisfied.
5.9 Summing up the submissions, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the original
complainant has submitted that on reading the decisions of this Court in the cases of Lalita Kumari
(supra) and Priyanka Srivastava (Supra) harmoniously and the limited scope of enquiry at the stage
of Section 156(3) application, the learned CJM erred in rejecting the application under Section
156(3) and therefore the High Court has rightly directed to register the complaint as FIR and
investigate into the matter.
5.10 Making above submissions, it is prayed to dismiss the present appeals.
6. We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respective parties at length.
6.1 The present proceedings arise out of a complaint filed by the original complainant under Section
156(3) Cr.P.C. The learned CJM, by a detailed order and giving cogent reasons, dismissed the said
application/complaint under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C and refused to direct the police to register an
FIR. It is not even disputed by the State that prior to filing of the application/complaint by the
complainant under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C., complaints were made to the police authorities, namely,
Officer in Charge of Bahela Police Station, DCP (South Division) and the SHO. The SHO conducted
a preliminary enquiry as mandated by a Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of Lalita
Kumari (supra) and upon finding that there was a delay of about two years in filing the complaint,
refused to register the FIR. That thereafter, the original complainant filed a complaint/application
before the learned CJM under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. and on a careful consideration of the
allegations in the complaint/application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C., by a detailed reasoned order,
the learned CJM dismissed the said application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C.
6.2 That while dismissing the application/complaint, the learned CJM verified the truth and veracity
of the allegations, regard being had to the nature of the allegations of the case, considering the
binding decision of the High Court of Calcutta in the case of Mukul Roy (supra). The learned CJM
also considered the decision of this Court in the case of Priyanka Srivastava (supra). The order
passed by the learned CJM was challenged before the High Court and by the impugned judgment
and order, not agreeing with the view taken by the co-ordinate Bench of the High Court in the case
of Mukul Roy (supra) and even not following the decision of this Court in the case of Priyanka
Srivastava (supra), and following the decision of Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of
Lalita Kumari (supra), the High Court has quashed and set aside the order passed by the learned
CJM and has directed to re-consider the application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C., in light of the
observations made in the impugned judgment and order. While quashing and setting aside the order
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
11
passed by the learned CJM, the High Court was of the opinion that at the stage of considering the
application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C., it was not open for the learned CJM to verify the truth and
veracity of the allegations. The High Court was of the opinion that in view of the decision of this
Court in the case of Lalita Kumari (supra), what was required to be considered was, whether the
allegations in the complaint/application disclose prima facie commission of a cognizable offence or
not and if so, the Magistrate has to pass an order directing the concerned police officer to register an
FIR. That thereafter, pursuant to the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court and
on remand, the learned CJM has straightway directed to register the application/complaint as an
FIR.
Therefore, as such, the subsequent order passed by the learned CJM is a consequential order passed
by the High Court on quashing and setting aside the order passed by the learned CJM dismissing the
application/complaint.
7. It is the contention on behalf of the appellants – original accused that at the stage of deciding the
application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C., it is open for the Magistrate to verify the truth and veracity
of the allegations, regard being had to the nature of the allegations of the case, and at that stage, the
Magistrate has to apply the judicial mind. Reliance is placed on the decisions of this Court in the
case of Priyanka Srivastava (supra); Maksud Saiyed (supra); Anil Kumar (supra); and Krishna Lal
Chawla v. State of Uttar Pradesh, reported in (2021) 5 SCC 435, as also, on the decision of the
Calcutta High Court in the case of Mukul Roy (supra). It is the case on behalf of the appellants that
the High Court has materially erred in relying upon and/or following the decision of this Court in
the case of Lalita Kumari (supra), while holding that at the stage of considering the application
under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C., the Magistrate has no jurisdiction to verify the truth and veracity of
the allegations. It is submitted that however the said decision shall not be applicable in a case where
the Magistrate exercises the powers under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. It is submitted that in the case of
Lalita Kumari (supra), this Court was considering the powers of the police officer under Section 154
Cr.P.C. and to register the FIR. It is submitted that the powers exercised by the Magistrate at the
stage of Section 156(3) Cr.P.C shall not be and/or cannot be equated with the powers to be exercised
by the police officer under Section 154 Cr.P.C.
8. On the other hand, it is the case on behalf of the original complainant as well as the State that as
mandated by this Court in the case of Lalita Kumari (supra), at the stage of registering the FIR,
neither the Magistrate nor the police officer has any jurisdiction to verify the truth and veracity of
the allegations and/or consider the truthfulness of the allegations. According to the respondents,
what is required to be considered at that stage is, whether the allegations in the
complaint/application disclose commission of any cognizable offence or not. Therefore, the main
issue posed for the consideration of this Court is, whether in the facts and circumstances of the case,
the learned CJM was justified in verifying the truth and veracity of the allegations at the stage of
deciding the application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. and whether at that stage the Magistrate is
required to apply judicial mind or not?
9. Article 21 of the Constitution protects lives and personal liberties of both the victim and those
accused of having committed an offence. For this reason, the procedure established by law should be
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
12
construed in the manner that the text of the statute ensures right to seek investigation to redress
injustice and uncover crime by recourse to expeditious, fair and impartial procedure.
Concomitantly, the law in application should protect blameless against those informants who levels
false allegations and abuse the law causing distress, humiliation and damage to reputation.
Relevant legal provisions of Chapter XII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
10. The Code vide Chapter XII, ranging from Section 154 to Section 176, deals with information to
the Police and their power to investigate. Section 154 deals with the information relating to the
commission of a cognizable offence and fiats the procedure to be adopted when prima facie
commission of a cognizable offence is made out. Section 156 authorises a police officer in-charge of a
Police station to investigate any cognizable offence without the order of a Magistrate. Sub-section
(3) of Section 156 provides for any Magistrate empowered under Section 190 to order an
investigation as mentioned in Section 156(1). In cases where a cognizable offence is suspected to
have been committed, the officer in-charge of the Police station, after sending a report to the
Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of such offence, is entitled under Section 157 to
investigate the facts and circumstances of the case and also to take steps for discovery and arrest of
the offender. Clauses (a) and (b) of the proviso to sub-section (1) to Section 157 give discretion to the
officer in-charge not to investigate a case, when information of such offence is given against any
person by name and the case is not of serious nature; or when it appears to the officer in-charge of
the Police station that there is no sufficient ground for entering the investigation. In each of the
cases mentioned in clauses
(a) and (b) to the proviso to sub-section (1) to Section 157, the officer in-charge of the Police station
has to file a report giving reasons for not complying with the requirements of sub-section (1) and in
a case covered by clause (b) to the proviso, also notify the informant that he will not investigate the
case or cause it to be investigated.
Section 159 gives power to a Magistrate, on receiving such report of the officer in-charge, to either
direct an investigation or if he thinks fit, proceed to hold a preliminary inquiry himself or through a
Magistrate subordinate to him, or otherwise dispose of the case in the manner provided by the Code.
11. Sections 160 to 164 deal with the power of the Police to require attendance of witnesses,
examination of witnesses, use of such statements in evidence, inducement for recording statement
and recording of statements. Section 165 deals with the power of a Police officer to conduct search
during investigation in the circumstances mentioned therein.
12. The power under the Code to investigate generally consists of following steps: (a) proceeding to
the spot; (b) ascertainment of facts and circumstances of the case; (c) discovery and arrest of the
suspected offender; (d) collection of evidence relating to commission of offence, which may consist
of examination of various persons, including the person accused, and reduction of the statement
into writing if the officer thinks fit; (e) the search of places of seizure of things considered necessary
for investigation and to be produced for trial; and (f) formation of opinion as to whether on the
material collected there is a case to place the accused before the Magistrate for trial and if so, taking
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
13
the necessary steps by filing a chargesheet under Section 173.
13. Section 173 provides that the investigation is to be completed without unnecessary delay and
makes it obligatory on the officer in-charge of the Police station to send a report to the Magistrate
concerned containing the necessary particulars in the manner provided therein.
Mandatory nature of Section 154(1) of the Code.
14. The question, whether the Police is bound to register a First Information Report (FIR) for a
cognizable offence under Section 154 on receiving the information as such or has some latitude for
conducting preliminary inquiry before registration of FIR, had led to the decision of the
Constitutional Bench in Lalita Kumari (supra). In this case, one of the arguments raised was that
when an innocent person is falsely implicated, he suffers mental tension, loss of reputation and his
personal liberty is seriously impaired and, therefore, Section 154 of the Code should be read and
interpreted in conformity with the mandate of Article 21 of the Constitution. Harmonizing the
delicate balance to be maintained between the rights of the victim and the accused, it was opined,
there are sufficient safeguards provided in the Code itself to protect liberty of an individual against
registration of a false case. However, as Section 154 has been drafted keeping in mind the interest of
the victim, and their right to have access to fair and independent investigation, the mandatory
registration of FIRs under Section 154 will not contravene Article 21 of the Constitution. Drawing on
several earlier judgments and the language of Section 154 of the Code, it was held that the Police is
bound to proceed to conduct investigation, even without receiving information about commission of
a cognizable offence if the officer in-charge otherwise suspects the commission of such an offence.
The legislative intent is to ensure that no information of commission of a cognizable offence is
ignored and not acted upon, which would otherwise result in unjustified protection of the alleged
offender/accused. Every cognizable offence must be promptly investigated in accordance with the
law. This being the legal position, there is no reason that there should be any discretion or option
left with the Police to register or not to register an FIR when information is given about commission
of a cognizable offence. This interpretation in a way keeps a check on the power of the Police, which
is required to protect the liberty of individuals and society rights inherent in a democracy. It is the
first step which provides access for justice to a victim and upholds the rule of law, facilitates swift
investigation and sometimes even prevents commission of crime and checks manipulation in
criminal cases.
15. To strike a balance, distinction is drawn between power of arrest of an accused person under
Section 41 and registration of an FIR under Section 154 of the Code. While registration of an FIR is
mandatory, the arrest of the accused on registration of the FIR is not. FIR is registered on the basis
of information without any qualification like credible, reasonable or true information.
Reasonableness or credibility of information is not a condition precedent for registration of the FIR.
However, for making arrest in terms of Section 41(1)(b) or (g), the legal requirements and mandate
is reflected in the expression ‘reasonable complaint’ or ‘credible information’.
16. Further there is a distinction between Section 154 and 157 as the latter provision postulates a
higher requirement than under Section 154 of the Code. Under Section 157(1) of the Code, a Police
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
14
officer can foreclose the investigation if it appears to him that there is no sufficient ground to
investigate. The requirement of Section 157(1) for the Police officer to start investigation is that he
has “reason to suspect the commission of an offence”. Therefore, the Police officer is not liable to
launch investigation in every FIR which is mandatorily registered on receiving information relating
to commission of a cognizable offence. When the Police officer forecloses investigation in terms of
clauses (a) and (b) of the proviso to Section 157(1), he must submit a report to the Magistrate. Here,
the Magistrate can direct the Police to investigate, or if he thinks fit, hold an inquiry. Where a Police
officer, in a given case, proceeds to investigate the matter, then he files the final report under
Section 173 of the Code. The noticeable feature of the scheme is that the Magistrate is kept in the
picture at all stages of investigation, but he is not authorised to interfere with the actual
investigation or to direct the Police how the investigation should be conducted.
17. Having said so, the Constitutional Bench in Lalita Kumari (supra), nevertheless, felt it was
necessary by judicial interpretation to carve out another layer of protection vide preliminary inquiry
by police. In certain instances, a preliminary inquiry may be justified owing to the genesis and
novelty of crimes. The category of cases in which preliminary inquiry may be made, purely as
illustration were indicated as matters relating to: (a) matrimonial/family disputes; (b) commercial
offences; (c) medical negligence cases; (d) corruption cases; or (e) cases where there is abnormal
delay/laches in initiating criminal prosecution, for example, over three months delay in reporting
the matter without satisfactorily explaining the reasons for the delay. The categorisation indicated
being illustrative is not exhaustive of the cases that may warrant preliminary inquiry. Preliminary
inquiry, when held, should be conducted without causing delay and in a time bound manner.
Reasons leading to the inquiry, causes and delay are to be mandatorily and meticulously recorded in
the General Dairy entry. Lalita Kumari (supra) initially held that the preliminary inquiry must be
completed within 7 days, which period was felt to be unrealistic in some cases and accordingly
clause (vii) of the judgment dated 12th November, 2012 was modified vide order dated 05th March
2014 in the following terms:-
“……we modify clause (vii) of paragraph 111 of our judgment dated 12th November,
2013, in the following manner:
"(vii) While ensuring and protecting the rights of the accused and the complainant, a
preliminary inquiry should be made time bound and in any case it should not exceed
fifteen days generally and in exceptional cases, by giving adequate reasons, six weeks’
time is provided. The fact of such delay and the causes of it must be reflected in the
General Diary entry."
18. Referring to the distinction between the power of the Police to investigate and the
judicial powers given to the Magistrate under Chapter XII of the Code, this Court in
Abhinandan Jha v. Dinesh Mishra, AIR 1968 SC 117 has observed that although the
Magistrate may have certain supervisory powers, nevertheless, from these
considerations alone he cannot impinge upon the jurisdiction of the Police to
investigate. The power of the Magistrate is conferred once a report in terms of
Section 157 or a report under Section 173(3) is submitted by the Police before the
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
15
Magistrate. Thus, the Magistrate, who has little or no scope to interfere with the
investigation, is not absolutely powerless in view of the powers conferred in terms of
Sections 159 and 173, and infra, Section 202 of the Code.
Inherent power of the High Court under the Code to quash the FIR.
19. At this stage, it is important to refer to judgments of this Court on exercise of inherent power of
the High Court in quashing the FIR. This power is normally exercised when the allegations in the
FIR or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in entirety, do not
constitute the offence alleged. Thus, in these cases, no question of appreciating evidence arises and
it would be manifestly unjust to allow the process of criminal court to be issued against the accused
persons.
20. Once an offence is disclosed, an investigation into the offence must necessarily follow in the
interest of justice. Investigation is required for the purpose of gathering necessary materials for
establishing or proving an offence which is disclosed. Absence of proper investigation where an
offence is disclosed, the offender may succeed in escaping from the consequences which would be
detrimental to the cause of justice and society at large. Whether an offence is disclosed or not must
necessarily depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. It depends upon consideration of
the relevant material. In other words, when an offence is disclosed, the court will not normally
interfere into an investigation, however, if the materials do not disclose an offence, no investigation
can be permitted.
21. Referring to the legal position, this Court in State of Haryana and others v. Bhajan Lal and
others, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335, while clarifying that it is not laying down any precise formula or an
exhaustive list, highlighted the cases in which the power to quash an FIR can be exercised as:
“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant provisions of the Code under
Chapter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series of decisions relating to
the exercise of the extraordinary power under Article 226 or the inherent powers under Section 482
of the Code which we have extracted and reproduced above, we give the following categories of cases
by way of illustration wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process
of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it may not be possible to lay down any
precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae and
to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be exercised.
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even if they are
taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence or
make out a case against the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any, accompanying
the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by Police officers under
Section 156(1) of the Code except under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section
155(2) of the Code.
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
16
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the evidence collected
in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case against
the accused. (4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but
constitute only a non- cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a Police officer without an
order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the Code. (5) Where the allegations
made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no
prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding
against the accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the
concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and continuance
of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act,
providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding
is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a
view to spite him due to private and personal grudge.”
22. One would grant that the jurisdiction of the Court when asked to invoke power under Section
156(3) is wider as held in Priyanka Srivastava (supra), yet there are limits within which the
Magistrate must act. When the Magistrate is satisfied that the allegations made disclose commission
of a cognizable offence, he must stay his hands, direct registration of an FIR and leave it to the
investigative agency to unearth the facts and ascertain the truth of the allegations. Magistrate in
terms of the ratio in Lalita Kumari (supra) can for good reasons direct preliminary enquiry. We
would now refer to the power of the Magistrate to take cognizance, postpone issue of process and
follow the procedure under Section 202 of the Code.
Difference in the power of Police to register and investigate an FIR under Section 154(1) read with
157 of the Code, and the Magistrate’s direction to register an FIR under Section 156(3) of the Code.
Power of the Magistrate to direct registration of an FIR under Section 156(3) in contrast with
post-cognizance stage power under Section 202 of the Code.
23. The operandi for registration of information in a cognizable offence and eventual investigation is
not limited to Police, and as observed above, sub-section (3) to Section 156, subject to legal
stipulations, gives the ameliorating power to a Magistrate empowered under Section 190 to order an
investigation in a cognizable offence. Two different powers vested with two distinct authorities,
namely the Police and the Magistrate, who discharge distinct functions and roles under the Code as
indicated above are not entirely imbricating.
24. The power of Magistrate to direct investigation falls under two limbs of the Code: one is
pre-cognizance stage under Section 156(3), and another on cognizance under Chapter XIV
(‘Conditions Requisite for Initiation of Proceedings’; Sections 190-199) read with Chapter XV
(‘Complaints to Magistrates’; Sections 200-210). These two powers are different and there also lies a
procedural distinction between the two.
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
17
25. A three Judge Bench decision of this Court in Ramdev Food Products Private Limited (supra)
had examined the distinction between powers of the Magistrate to direct registration of an FIR
under Section 156(3) and power of the Magistrate to proceed under Section 202 of the Code. It was
observed that the power under the former Section is to be exercised, on receiving a complaint or a
Police report or information from any person other than the Police officer or upon his own
knowledge, before he takes cognizance under Section
190. Once the Magistrate takes cognizance, the Magistrate has discretion to take recourse to his
powers under Section 202, which provides for postponement of the issue of process and inquire into
the case himself or direct investigation to be made by a Police officer or by such other person as he
thinks fit for the purpose of deciding whether or not there are sufficient grounds for proceedings.
The proviso to Section 202 states that no direction for investigation shall be made where a
complaint has not been made by a Court, unless the complainant and the witnesses present (if any)
are examined on oath under Section 200. When it appears to the Magistrate that the offence
complained of is triable exclusively by the Court of Sessions, he shall call upon the complainant to
produce all his witnesses and examine them on oath. However, in such cases, the Magistrate cannot
issue direction for investigation of an offence.
Thus, the Magistrate has the power, when a written complaint is made, to issue direction under
Section 156(3), but this power is to be exercised before the Magistrate takes cognizance of the
offence under Section
190. However, in both cases, whether under Section 156(3) or under Section 202 of the Code, the
person accused as the perpetrator, when the proceedings are pending before the Magistrate,
remains unrepresented. Under Section 203, the Magistrate, after considering the statement of the
complainant and witnesses (if any) on oath and the result of an inquiry (if any) under Section 202,
can dismiss the complaint if he is of the opinion that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding
and in every such case briefly record his reasons. If the Magistrate after taking cognizance of the
offence, is of the opinion that there are sufficient grounds for proceeding he will issue the process to
the accused for appearance as per the procedure and mode specified under Section 204 of the Code.
Process to the accused under Section 204 falls under Chapter XVI of the Code and is issued post the
cognizance and inquiry/investigation/evidence recorded in a private complaint in terms of Section
202 of the Code.
26. In Ramdev Food Products Private Limited (supra), examining whether discretion of the
Magistrate to call for a report under Section 202 instead of directing investigation under Section
156(3) is controlled by any defined parameters, it was held thus:
“22. Thus, we answer the first question by holding that: 22.1. The direction under
Section 156(3) is to be issued, only after application of mind by the Magistrate. When
the Magistrate does not take cognizance and does not find it necessary to postpone
the issuance of process and finds a case made out to proceed forthwith, direction
under the said provision is issued. In other words, where on account of credibility of
information available, or weighing the interest of justice it is considered appropriate
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
18
to straightaway direct investigation, such a direction is issued.
22.2. The cases where Magistrate takes cognizance and postpones issuance of process
are cases where the Magistrate has yet to determine “existence of sufficient ground to
proceed”. Category of cases falling under para 120.6 in Lalita Kumari [Lalita Kumari
v. State of U.P., (2014) 2 SCC 1 : (2014) 1 SCC (Cri) 524] may fall under Section 202.
22.3. Subject to these broad guidelines available from the scheme of the Code, exercise of discretion
by the Magistrate is guided by interest of justice from case to case.” Explaining the nature of cases to
be dealt with under Section 202 of the Code, the judgment observes, are those cases where the
material available is not clear to proceed further. The Magistrate, though in seisin of the matter
having taken cognizance, has to decide whether there is any ground to proceed further. Further,
Section 202 not only refers to an inquiry but also to an investigation. Thus, in such cases, the Police
cannot on its own exercise the power of arrest in course of making its report in pursuance of the
direction under Section 202 of the Code.
27. In this Court in Priyanka Srivastava (supra) referred to the nature of power exercised by the
Magistrate under Section 156(3) of the Code and after referring to several earlier judgments held
that the direction for registration of an FIR should not be issued in a routine manner. The
Magistrate is required to apply his mind and exercise his discretion in a judicious manner. If the
Magistrate finds that the allegations made before him disclose commission of a cognizable offence,
he can forward the complaint to the Police for investigation under Section 156 and thereby save
valuable time of the Magistrate from being wasted in inquiry as it is primarily the duty of the Police
to investigate. However, the Magistrate also has the power to take cognizance and take recourse to
procedure under Section 202 of the Code and postpone the issue of process where the Magistrate is
yet to determine existence of sufficient ground to proceed. In a third category of cases, the Court
may not take cognizance or direct registration of an FIR, but direct preliminary inquiry in terms of
the dictum in Lalita Kumari’s case (supra).
28. In Priyanka Srivastava (supra), this Court highlighted abuse of the criminal process by the
unprincipled and deviant litigants who do knock at the door of the criminal court for malevolent
reasons. In the said case criminal action was initiated by those against whom the financial
institutions had proceeded under the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002. This was notwithstanding the protection given to the
officers under Section 32 of the aforesaid Act against action taken in good faith. Reiterating Lalita
Kumari (supra), it was observed that an action under Section 156(3) should not be entertained
without the complainant taking recourse to sub-section (1) and (3) of Section 154 and compliances
of these two Sections should be clearly spelt out in the application and necessary documents filed.
To check malevolence and false assertions, the Court directed that every petition/application under
Section 156(3) should be supported by an affidavit so that the person making an application should
be conscious of it and to see that no false allegation is made. If the affidavit is found to be false, the
complainant will be liable for prosecution in accordance with the law. Vigilance is specially required
in cases pertaining to fiscal sphere, matrimonial/family disputes, commercial offences, medical
negligence cases, corruption cases, or cases where there is abnormal delay/laches. Thus, the
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
19
Magistrate must be attentive and proceed with perspicacity to examine the allegation made and the
nature of those allegations. He should not issue directions without proper application of mind which
would be contrary to the object and purpose of the statute.
29. As to the scope of power of the Magistrate to direct an FIR under Section 156(3), this court in
Mohd. Yusuf v. Afaq Jahan (Smt) and another, (2006) 1 SCC 627 opined that:
“11. The clear position therefore is that any Judicial Magistrate, before taking
cognizance of the offence, can order investigation under Section 156(3) of the Code. If
he does so, he is not to examine the complainant on oath because he was not taking
cognizance of any offence therein. For the purpose of enabling the Police to start
investigation it is open to the Magistrate to direct the Police to register an FIR. There
is nothing illegal in doing so. After all registration of an FIR involves only the process
of entering the substance of the information relating to the commission of the
cognizable offence in a book kept by the officer in charge of the Police station as
indicated in Section 154 of the Code. Even if a Magistrate does not say in so many
words while directing investigation under Section 156(3) of the Code that an FIR
should be registered, it is the duty of the officer in charge of the Police station to
register the FIR regarding the cognizable offence disclosed by the complainant
because that Police officer could take further steps contemplated in Chapter XII of
the Code only thereafter.”
30. In Anju Chaudhary (supra), this court analysing the power of the Magistrate under Section
156(3) observed:
“41. Thus, the Magistrate exercises a very limited power under Section 156(3) and so
is its discretion. It does not travel into the arena of merit of the case if such case was
fit to proceed further. This distinction has to be kept in mind by the court in different
kinds of cases….”
31. In HDFC Securities Ltd. v. State of Maharashtra, (2017) 1 SCC 640, this court while interpreting
the words “may take cognizance” and Section 156(3), held:
“24. Per contra, the learned counsel for Respondent 2 submitted that the complaint
has disclosed the commission of an offence which is cognizable in nature and in the
light of Lalita Kumari case [Lalita Kumari v. State of U.P., (2014) 2 SCC 1 : (2014) 1
SCC (Cri) 524] , registration of FIR becomes mandatory. We observe that it is clear
from the use of the words “may take cognizance” in the context in which they occur,
that the same cannot be equated with “must take cognizance”. The word “may” give
discretion to the Magistrate in the matter. If on a reading of the complaint he finds
that the allegations therein disclose a cognizable offence and that the forwarding of
the complaint to the police for investigation under Section 156(3) will be conducive to
justice and save the valuable time of the Magistrate from being wasted in enquiring
into a matter, which was primarily the duty of the police to investigate, he will be
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
20
justified in adopting that course as an alternative to taking cognizance of the offence,
himself. It is settled that when a Magistrate receives a complaint, he is not bound to
take cognizance if the facts alleged in the complaint, do not disclose the commission
of an offence.”
32. However, the position is different at the post- cognizance stage. Under Section 202, the
Magistrate can analyse the veracity of the complaint made and appreciate whether there are
grounds to proceed further. In Chandra Deo Singh v. Prokash Chandra Bose alias Chabi Bose and
Another, AIR 1963 SC 1430, this Court referred to the objective of Section 202, to observe:
“8. ……to enable the Magistrate to form an opinion as to whether process should be
issued or not and to remove from his mind any hesitation that he may have felt upon
the mere perusal of the complaint and the consideration of the complainant's
evidence on oath. The courts have also pointed out in these cases that what the
Magistrate has to see is whether there is evidence in support of the allegations of the
complainant and not whether the evidence is sufficient to warrant a conviction. The
learned Judges in some of these cases have been at pains to observe that an enquiry
under Section 202 is not to be likened to a trial which can only take place after
process is issued, and that there can be only one trial. No doubt, as stated in
sub-section (1) of Section 202 itself, the object of the enquiry is to ascertain the truth
or falsehood of the complaint, but the Magistrate making the enquiry has to do this
only with reference to the intrinsic quality of the statements made before him at the
enquiry which would naturally mean the complaint itself, the statement on oath
made by the complainant and the statements made before him by persons examined
at the instance of the complainant.”
33. Counsel for the accused, on the other hand, have highlighted the complainant’s conduct, which it
is submitted, is contradictory to her explanation for the delay. She was/is not a timid person and an
experienced social and political worker of standing. She has been continuously filing FIRs. In an FIR
filed on 31 st August 2018, she had made allegations of rape against a third person who is a political
worker in the same organisation. In a complaint filed on 12 th December 2019, she had alleged that
the accused had met her on four occasions in the last year and each time they had locked “me for 4
to 5 hours and pressurized me for withdrawing the case”. The police after investigation on this
complaint dated 12 th December 2019 had filed an FIR No. 131 of 2019 dated 20th December 2019
and filed closure report dated 16 th June 2020. As a matter of fact, the case has been closed. The
complainant subsequently filed another complaint dated 6th February 2020, wherein there is no
mention of that particular case of the alleged rape incident. Even in the complaint filed on 12th
March 2020 by the complainant, there was again no mention of the alleged rape. The complainant’s
assertion in the counter affidavit that she had filed a police complaint in respect of the rape incident
on 29th November 2018 by lodging a complaint the very next day at 11:00 a.m. at Behala (Women)
Police Station has been denied by the State of West Bengal, who have informed this Court that there
is no such record of the complaint being filed. The accused filed an application on 4th October 2021
under the Right to Information Act, 2005 and have received on 22 nd October 2021 copies of
preliminary inquiries done by Police Station Bhawanipore dated 30 th October 2020 and 5 th
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
21
November 2020. The preliminary inquiries conclude that in the communications made to the police
between 2018 to 2020, there is no allegation that rape took place on 29 th November 2018. As per
the report the complainant had failed to give any logical and satisfactory account for the delay in
lodging the complaint. The accused assert that the complaint is an abuse of the process of law and
has been filed to put pressure on the accused in view of the rape case filed by her against the third
person.
34. At the same time, it is noticeable that the complainant/informant has made several allegations
of rape, sexual harassment, etc. against persons with whom she had been acquainted and working.
The complainant/ informant has pleaded threat and harassment at the hands of the persons named
as perpetrators, who are people of influence and power as the ground and reason for delay. She
pleads that period of limitation prescribed in section 468 of the Code does not apply to an offence
punishable with imprisonment exceeding three years. On the question of delay, reliance is placed on
the constitutional bench decision of this Court in the L.R. Melwani (supra). It is submitted that this
Court on several occasions has sustained conviction relying solely upon the testimony of the
prosecution/victim, when there is no doubt about her credibility and trustworthiness. While
examining the question of delay in making the complaint, the courts must remain alive to the fact
that it is difficult for a woman to come forward and make a statement alleging rape or sexual assault.
35. Every criminal case, it is stated, is a voyage of discovery in which truth is the quest. Right from
the inception of the judicial system, it has been accepted that discovery, vindication and
establishment of truth are the primary purposes underlying the existence of the courts of justice.
However, the supremacy of truth is easier to assert than to define. Often this task becomes difficult
when contradictory factual positions are asserted duly supported and affirmed on oath. In
adversarial systems, the process of ascertaining truth requires compliance of procedures and rules
of evidence, and limit the role of the adjudicator, in acting as an investigator to verify veracity of the
allegations and counter-allegations till evidence and material is laid and examined as per codified
procedural law. Yet it is believed that clash of adversaries is best calculated to getting out the facts.
In a well-designed system, judicial findings of formal legal truth should coincide with the
substantive truth. This can happen when the facts as asserted by the contestants are skilfully
explored in accordance with the procedure prescribed by law. Abuse of law must be checked, if
possible, at the very threshold, albeit when it is possible and also as per the procedure prescribed by
law. V.R. Krishna Iyer, J. aptly summarize the procedure on the quest for truth and justice in Jasraj
Inder Singh v. Hemraj Multanchand, (1977) 2 SCC 155:
“8. To pick out a single true item which had been inextricably got enmeshed in the
skein of entries and cross-entries was to tear up the fabric of the whole truth. In a
finer sense, harmony is the beautiful totality of a whole sequence of notes and the
concord of sweet sounds is ill-tuned into disjointed discord if a note or two is
unmusically cut and played. Truth, like song, is whole and half-truth can be noise;
Justice is truth, is beauty and the strategy of healing injustice is discovery of the
whole truth and harmonising human relations. Law's finest hour is not in meditating
on abstractions but in being the delivery agent of full fairness. This divagation is
justified by the need to remind ourselves that the grammar of justice according to law
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
22
is not little litigative solution of isolated problems but resolving the conflict in its
wider bearings.”
36. The State of West Bengal has drawn our attention to the judgment of this Court in Gopal Das
Sindhi and Others v. State of Assam and Another, AIR 1961 SC 986 to the effect that even when a
private complaint is filed, the Magistrate is not bound to take cognizance under Section 190 as the
word used therein is ‘may’, which should not be construed as ‘must’ for obvious reasons. The
Magistrate may well exercise discretion in sending such complaint under Section 156(3) to the police
for investigation. However, when a Magistrate chooses not to proceed under Section 156(3), he
cannot simply dismiss the complaint if he finds that resorting to Section 156(3) is not advisable.
Reference in this regard can also be made to Suresh Chand Jain v. State of M.P. and another, (2001)
2 SCC 628 which distinguishes between the power of the police to investigate under Section 156, the
direction of the Magistrate for investigation under Section 156(3) and post-summoning inquiry and
investigation after cognizance under Section 190 and Section 202 of the Code. When a Magistrate
orders investigation under Section 156(3), he does so before cognizance of the offence. If he takes
cognizance, he needs to follow the procedure envisaged in Chapter XV (see Afaq Jahan (supra).
The decision in Mona Panwar v. High Court of Judicature of Allahabad through its Registrar and
Others, (2011) 3 SCC 496 is rather succinct. This Court held that when a complaint is presented
before a Magistrate, he has two options. One is to pass an order contemplated by Section 156(3). The
second one is to direct examination of the complainant on oath and the witness present, and
proceed further in the manner provided by Section 202. An order under Section 156(3) is in the
nature of a peremptory reminder or intimation to the police to exercise its plenary power of
investigation under Section 156(1). However, once the Magistrate has taken cognizance under
Section 190 of the Code, he cannot ask for an investigation by the Police. After cognizance has been
taken, if the Magistrate wants any investigation, it will be under Section 202, whose purpose is to
ascertain whether there is prima facie case against the person accused of the offence and to prevent
issue of process in a false or vexatious complaint intended to harass the person named. Such
examination is provided, therefore, to find out whether there is or not sufficient ground for
proceeding further.
37. We do not intend to go into the question of the merits of the allegations, and what procedure the
Magistrate should follow as this is an aspect which the Magistrate must first consider and decide
judiciously and as per the law. What is impermissible and contrary to law is an adjudication on
merits of the allegations and determination of the facts as baseless, without further scrutiny and
examination. Therefore, the High Court was correct in remitting the matter to the judicial
magistrate for further examination.
38. We were informed that the Magistrate, on remand, has passed an order under Section 156(3)
directing registration of the FIR. He has misread the order and directions given by the High Court.
In terms of the judgments of this Court, the Magistrate is required to examine, apply his judicious
mind and then exercise discretion whether or not to issue directions under Section 156(3) or
whether he should take cognizance and follow the procedure under Section 202. He can also direct a
preliminary inquiry by the Police in terms of the law laid down by this Court in Lalita Kumari
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
23
(supra).
39. We would refrain and not comment on the allegations made as this may affect the case put up by
either side. The accused do not have any right to appear before the Magistrate before summons are
issued. However, the law gives them a right to appear before the revisionary court in proceedings,
when the complainant challenges the order rejecting an application under Section 156(3) of the
Code. The appellants, therefore, had appeared before the High Court and contested the proceedings.
They have filed several papers and documents before the High Court and this Court. To be fair to
them, the copies of the papers and documents filed before the High Court and this Court would also
be forwarded and kept on record of the Magistrate who would, thereupon, examine and consider the
matter. However, the complainant/informant would be entitled to question the genuineness and the
contents of the said documents.
40. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, while affirming the impugned judgment
and order passed by the High Court remanding the matter back to the learned Magistrate, we set
aside the subsequent order passed by the Magistrate on remand, pursuant to the impugned
judgment and order passed by the High Court and remit the matter back to the learned Magistrate
to examine and apply his judicial mind and then exercise discretion whether or not to issue
directions under section 156(3) or whether he can take cognizance and follow the procedure under
section 202. He can also direct the preliminary enquiry by the police in terms of the law laid down
by this Court in the case of Lalita Kumari (supra). Copies of the papers and documents filed before
the High Court and this Court could also be forwarded and brought on record of the Magistrate, who
would thereupon examine and consider the matter. As observed hereinabove, the
complainant/informant would be entitled to question the genuineness of the contents of the said
documents.
41. The present appeals stand disposed of in terms of the above.
………………………………J.
                             [M.R. SHAH]
NEW DELHI;                   ………………………………J.
MAY 04, 2023.                [SANJIV KHANNA]
Kailash Vijayvargiya vs Rajlakshmi Chaudhuri on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60515502/
24
