Supreme Court of India
M. Suresh Kumar Reddy vs Canara Bank on 11 May, 2023
Author: Abhay S. Oka
Bench: Abhay S. Oka, Rajesh Bindal
                                                                        REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7121 OF 2022
                         M. Suresh Kumar Reddy                        …Appellant
                                                    versus
                         Canara Bank & Ors.                           ...Respondents
                                              J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1. The respondent−Bank filed an application under Section 7 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, 2016 (for short, ‘the IB Code’) before the National Company Law Tribunal, Hyderabad,
Telangana. The said application was filed against a Corporate Debtor M/s Kranthi Edifice Pvt.
Signature Not Verified Digitally signed by Anita Malhotra Ltd. The present appellant claims to be a
suspended Date: 2023.05.11 17:19:35 IST Reason:
Director of the Corporate Debtor. National Company Law Civil Appeal No. 7121 OF 2022 Tribunal
(for short, ‘NCLT’), by an Order dated 27 th June 2022, admitted the application filed by the
respondent− Bank and declared a moratorium for the purposes referred in Section 14 of the IB
Code. The appellant claiming to be an aggrieved person preferred an appeal against the said Order
before the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (for short, ‘NCLAT’). By the impugned
judgment dated 5th August 2022, NCLAT has dismissed the appeal.
2. The first respondent, Canara Bank is the successor of Syndicate Bank, which made application
under Section 7 of the IB Code to NCLT. Syndicate Bank was merged into the first respondent−
Canara Bank. A letter of sanction dated 2nd April 2016 was issued by Syndicate Bank by which
credit facilities were sanctioned to the Corporate Debtor for one−year valid up to 28th February
2017. A Secured Overdraft Facility of Rs. 12 crores was granted by the Syndicate Bank, apart from
sanctioning the Bank Guarantee limit of Rs. 110 crores. Thus, the facilities granted by the Syndicate
Bank to the Corporate Debtor were fund−based (Overdraft Facility) and non−fund−based (Bank
M. Suresh Kumar Reddy vs Canara Bank on 11 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131399423/
1
Guarantees).
Civil Appeal No. 7121 OF 2022
3. In the application under Section 7 of the IB Code, the Syndicate Bank stated that as on 30 th
November 2019, the liability of the corporate debtor under the Secured Overdraft Facility was
Rs.74,52,87,564.93. The liability of the Corporate Debtor towards outstanding Bank Guarantees was
Rs.19,16,20,100.
4. On 21st October 2022, this Court while issuing notice, recorded a statement of the learned senior
counsel appearing for the appellant that a proposal for settlement under a One−Time Settlement
Scheme has been submitted to the first respondent−Bank and a sum of Rs.6 crores has been
deposited with the first respondent−Bank. Eventually, the said proposal was turned down by the
first respondent− Bank. Therefore, the present appeal was taken up for hearing.
SUBMISSIONS
5. The learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that repeated efforts were
made to have one−time settlement of the dues payable to the first respondent. But the said request
was not acceded to. He Civil Appeal No. 7121 OF 2022 relied upon a decision of this Court in the
case of Vidarbha Industries Power Limited v. Axis Bank Limited1. He submitted that even assuming
that the existence of financial debt and default on the part of the Corporate Debtor was established,
the NCLT was not under an obligation to admit the application under Section 7. For good reasons,
NCLT could have refused to admit the application under Section 7 of the IB Code. He also fairly
pointed out the Order dated 22 nd September 2022 passed by this Court in a Review Petition
seeking a review of the decision in the case of Vidarbha Industries1.
6. He invited our attention to the correspondence between the Government of Telangana and the
Syndicate Bank. There were contracts granted by the Telangana Government to the Corporate
Debtor. He invited our attention to a letter dated 5th November 2018 addressed by the Executive
Engineer on behalf of the Government of Telangana requesting the Bank to extend the Bank
Guarantees furnished by the said Bank on the request of the Corporate Debtor. Similarly, by a letter
dated 7 th August 2019, the Government of Telangana requested the Syndicate Bank to extend 29
Bank Guarantees mentioned 1 2022 (8) SCC 352 Civil Appeal No. 7121 OF 2022 in the said letter. He
pointed out that the Corporate Debtor addressed a letter to the Bank on 9 th January 2020 by which
a request was made to extend the Bank Guarantees. He also invited the attention of the Court to a
letter dated 8th January 2020 addressed by the Government of Telangana to the Bank requesting
the Bank to extend the seven Bank Guarantees mentioned therein. He submitted that
notwithstanding the requests made by the State Government, Syndicate Bank did not extend the
Bank Guarantees. Thus, in a sense, the failure of the Bank to extend the Bank Guarantees forced the
Corporate Debtor to commit default. He submitted that the Bank is responsible for triggering the
default. The learned counsel invited our attention to the interim order dated 24 th April 2020
passed by the learned Single Judge of the Telangana High Court by which the first respondent−Bank
was restrained from taking coercive steps pursuant to letters of invocation of Bank Guarantees
M. Suresh Kumar Reddy vs Canara Bank on 11 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131399423/
2
including handing over of Demand Drafts to the State Government. He urged that in the teeth of this
order, NCLT ought not to have admitted the application under Section 7.
7. Learned counsel appearing for the first respondent− Bank firstly pointed out that the decision in
the case of Civil Appeal No. 7121 OF 2022 Vidarbha Industries1 is in peculiar facts of that case, as is
explained by the same Bench while disposing of the Review Petition. He submitted that the decision
of this Court in the case of E.S. Krishnamurthy and others v. Bharath Hi− Tecch Builders Private
Limited2 still holds the field. He, therefore, submitted that once NCLT is satisfied that there is a
financial debt and a default has occurred, it is bound to admit an application under Section 7. He
submitted that the request made by the Corporate Debtor for extension of the Bank Guarantees was
specifically rejected as communicated by the first respondent by a letter dated 18 th January 2021
addressed to the Corporate Debtor. He would, therefore, submit that there is no error committed by
NCLT in admitting application under Section 7.
OUR VIEW
8. We have given careful consideration to the submissions. This Court in the case of Innoventive
Industries Limited v. ICICI Bank and Another3 has explained the scope of Section 7. Paragraph
nos.28 to 30 of the said decision read thus:− 2 (2022) 3 SCC 161 3 (2018) 1 SCC 407 Civil Appeal No.
7121 OF 2022 “28. When it comes to a financial creditor triggering the process, Section 7 becomes
relevant. Under the Explanation to Section 7(1), a default is in respect of a financial debt owed to
any financial creditor of the corporate debtor — it need not be a debt owed to the applicant financial
creditor. Under Section 7(2), an application is to be made under sub− section (1) in such form and
manner as is prescribed, which takes us to the Insolvency and Bankruptcy (Application to
Adjudicating Authority) Rules, 2016. Under Rule 4, the application is made by a financial creditor in
Form 1 accompanied by documents and records required therein. Form 1 is a detailed form in 5
parts, which requires particulars of the applicant in Part I, particulars of the corporate debtor in Part
II, particulars of the proposed interim resolution professional in Part III, particulars of the financial
debt in Part IV and documents, records and evidence of default in Part V. Under Rule 4(3), the
applicant is to dispatch a copy of the application filed with the adjudicating authority by registered
post or speed post to the registered office of the corporate debtor. The speed, within Civil Appeal No.
7121 OF 2022 which the adjudicating authority is to ascertain the existence of a default from the
records of the information utility or on the basis of evidence furnished by the financial creditor, is
important. This it must do within 14 days of the receipt of the application. It is at the stage of Section
7(5), where the adjudicating authority is to be satisfied that a default has occurred, that the
corporate debtor is entitled to point out that a default has not occurred in the sense that the “debt”,
which may also include a disputed claim, is not due. A debt may not be due if it is not payable in law
or in fact.
The moment the adjudicating authority is satisfied that a default has occurred, the application must
be admitted unless it is incomplete, in which case it may give notice to the applicant to rectify the
defect within 7 days of receipt of a notice from the adjudicating authority. Under sub−section (7),
the adjudicating authority shall then communicate the order passed to the financial creditor and
corporate debtor within 7 days of admission or rejection of such application, as the case may be.
M. Suresh Kumar Reddy vs Canara Bank on 11 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131399423/
3
29. The scheme of Section 7 stands in contrast with the scheme under Civil Appeal No. 7121 OF
2022 Section 8 where an operational creditor is, on the occurrence of a default, to first deliver a
demand notice of the unpaid debt to the operational debtor in the manner provided in Section 8(1)
of the Code. Under Section 8(2), the corporate debtor can, within a period of 10 days of receipt of
the demand notice or copy of the invoice mentioned in sub−section (1), bring to the notice of the
operational creditor the existence of a dispute or the record of the pendency of a suit or arbitration
proceedings, which is pre−existing—i.e. before such notice or invoice was received by the corporate
debtor. The moment there is existence of such a dispute, the operational creditor gets out of the
clutches of the Code.
30. On the other hand, as we have seen, in the case of a corporate debtor who commits a default of a
financial debt, the adjudicating authority has merely to see the records of the information utility or
other evidence produced by the financial creditor to satisfy itself that a default has occurred. It is of
no matter that the debt is disputed so long as the debt is “due” i.e. payable unless interdicted by
some law or has not yet become due in Civil Appeal No. 7121 OF 2022 the sense that it is payable at
some future date. It is only when this is proved to the satisfaction of the adjudicating authority that
the adjudicating authority may reject an application and not otherwise.” (emphasis added)
9. The view taken in the case of Innoventive Industries3 has been followed by this Court in the case
of E.S. Krishnamurthy and others2. Paragraph nos.32 to 34 of the said decision read thus:
                           32.In Innoventive            industries
                           [Innoventive                  Industries
Ltd. v. ICICI Bank, (2018) 1 SCC 407, paras 28 and 30 : (2018) 1 SCC (Civ) 356], a two−Judge Bench
of this Court has explained the ambit of Section 7 IBC, and held that the adjudicating authority only
has to determine whether a “default” has occurred i.e. whether the “debt” (which may still be
disputed) was due and remained unpaid. If the adjudicating authority is of the opinion that a
“default” has occurred, it has to admit the application unless it is incomplete. Speaking through
Rohinton F. Nariman, Civil Appeal No. 7121 OF 2022 J., the Court has observed: (SCC pp.
438−39, paras 28 & 30) “28. When it comes to a financial creditor triggering the process, Section 7
becomes relevant. Under the Explanation to Section 7(1), a default is in respect of a financial debt
owed to [Ed. : The word between two asterisks has been emphasised in original.] any [Ed. : The
word between two asterisks has been emphasised in original.] financial creditor of the corporate
debtor — it need not be a debt owed to the applicant financial creditor. Under Section 7(2), an
application is to be made under sub−section (1) in such form and manner as is prescribed, which
takes us to the Insolvency and Bankruptcy (Application to Adjudicating Authority) Rules, 2016.
Under Rule 4, the application is made by a financial creditor in Form 1 accompanied by documents
and records required therein. Form 1 is a detailed form in 5 parts, which requires particulars of the
applicant in Part I, particulars of the corporate debtor in Part II, Civil Appeal No. 7121 OF 2022
particulars of the proposed interim resolution professional in Part III, particulars of the financial
debt in Part IV and documents, records and evidence of default in Part V. Under Rule 4(3), the
applicant is to dispatch a copy of the application filed with the adjudicating authority by registered
post or speed post to the registered office of the corporate debtor. The speed, within which the
M. Suresh Kumar Reddy vs Canara Bank on 11 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131399423/
4
adjudicating authority is to ascertain the existence of a default from the records of the information
utility or on the basis of evidence furnished by the financial creditor, is important. This it must do
within 14 days of the receipt of the application. It is at the stage of Section 7(5), where the
adjudicating authority is to be satisfied that a default has occurred, that the corporate debtor is
entitled to point out that a default has not occurred in the sense that the “debt”, which may also
include a disputed claim, is not due. A debt may not be due if it is not payable in law or in fact. The
moment the adjudicating authority Civil Appeal No. 7121 OF 2022 is satisfied that a default has
occurred, the application must be admitted unless it is incomplete, in which case it may give notice
to the applicant to rectify the defect within 7 days of receipt of a notice from the adjudicating
authority.
Under sub−section (7), the adjudicating authority shall then communicate the order passed to the
financial creditor and corporate debtor within 7 days of admission or rejection of such application,
as the case may be.
* * *
30. On the other hand, as we have seen, in the case of a corporate debtor who commits a default of a
financial debt, the adjudicating authority has merely to see the records of the information utility or
other evidence produced by the financial creditor to satisfy itself that a default has occurred. It is of
no matter that the debt is disputed so long as the debt is “due” i.e. payable unless interdicted by
some law Civil Appeal No. 7121 OF 2022 or has not yet become due in the sense that it is payable at
some future date. It is only when this is proved to the satisfaction of the adjudicating authority that
the adjudicating authority may reject an application and not otherwise.”
33. In the present case, the adjudicating authority noted that it had listed the petition for admission
on diverse dates and had adjourned it, inter alia, to allow the parties to explore the possibility of a
settlement. Evidently, no settlement was arrived at by all the original petitioners who had instituted
the proceedings. The adjudicating authority noticed that joint consent terms dated 12−2−2020 had
been filed before it. But it is common ground that these consent terms did not cover all the original
petitioners who were before the adjudicating authority. The adjudicating authority was apprised of
the fact that the claims of 140 investors had been fully settled by the respondent. The respondent
also noted that of the claims of the original petitioners who have moved the adjudicating authority,
only 13 have been settled while, according to it “40 are in the process of settlement and 39 Civil
Appeal No. 7121 OF 2022 are pending settlements”. Eventually, the adjudicating authority did not
entertain the petition on the ground that the procedure under IBC is summary, and it cannot
manage or decide upon each and every claim of the individual homebuyers. The adjudicating
authority also held that since the process of settlement was progressing “in all seriousness”, instead
of examining all the individual claims, it would dispose of the petition by directing the respondent to
settle all the remaining claims “seriously” within a definite time−frame. The petition was
accordingly disposed of by directing the respondent to settle the remaining claims no later than
within three months, and that if any of the remaining original petitioners were aggrieved by the
settlement process, they would be at liberty to approach the adjudicating authority again in
accordance with law. The adjudicating authority's decision was also upheld by the appellate
M. Suresh Kumar Reddy vs Canara Bank on 11 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131399423/
5
authority, who supported its conclusions.
34. The adjudicating authority has clearly acted outside the terms of its jurisdiction under Section
7(5) IBC. The adjudicating authority is empowered only to verify whether a default has Civil Appeal
No. 7121 OF 2022 occurred or if a default has not occurred. Based upon its decision, the
adjudicating authority must then either admit or reject an application, respectively. These are the
only two courses of action which are open to the adjudicating authority in accordance with Section
7(5). The adjudicating authority cannot compel a party to the proceedings before it to settle a
dispute.” (emphasis added)
10. Thus, once NCLT is satisfied that the default has occurred, there is hardly a discretion left with
NCLT to refuse admission of the application under Section 7. Default is defined under sub−section
12 of Section 3 of the IB Code which reads thus:
“3. Definitions: − In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires,− .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
(12) “default” means non−payment of debt when whole or any part or instalment of the amount of
debt has become due and payable and is not [paid] by the debtor or the corporate debtor, as the case
may be;” Thus, even the non−payment of a part of debt when it becomes due and payable will
amount to default on the Civil Appeal No. 7121 OF 2022 part of a Corporate Debtoṛ. In such a case,
an order of admission under Section 7 of the IB Code must follow. If the NCLT finds that there is a
debt, but it has not become due and payable, the application under Section 7 can be rejected.
Otherwise, there is no ground available to reject the application.
11. Reliance is placed on the decision of this Court in the case of Vidarbha Industries1 and in
particular, what is held therein in paragraph nos. 86 to 89 which reads thus:− “86. Even though
Section 7(5)(a) IBC may confer discretionary power on the adjudicating authority, such
discretionary power cannot be exercised arbitrarily or capriciously. If the facts and circumstances
warrant exercise of discretion in a particular manner, discretion would have to be exercised in that
manner.
87. Ordinarily, the adjudicating authority (NCLT) would have to exercise its discretion to admit an
application under Section 7 IBC and initiate CIRP on satisfaction of the existence of a financial debt
and default on the part of the corporate debtor in payment of the debt, Civil Appeal No. 7121 OF
2022 unless there are good reasons not to admit the petition.
88. The adjudicating authority (NCLT) has to consider the grounds made out by the corporate
debtor against admission, on its own merits. For example, when admission is opposed on the
ground of existence of an award or a decree in favour of the corporate debtor, and the
awarded/decretal amount exceeds the amount of the debt, the adjudicating authority would have to
exercise its discretion under Section 7(5)(a) IBC to keep the admission of the application of the
financial creditor in abeyance, unless there is good reason not to do so. The adjudicating authority
may, for example, admit the application of the financial creditor, notwithstanding any award or
decree, if the award/decretal amount is incapable of realisation. The example is only illustrative.
M. Suresh Kumar Reddy vs Canara Bank on 11 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131399423/
6
89. In this case, the adjudicating authority (NCLT) has simply brushed aside the case of the
appellant that an amount of Rs 1730 crores was realisable by the appellant in terms of the order
passed by APTEL in favour of the appellant, with the cursory observation that disputes if any Civil
Appeal No. 7121 OF 2022 between the appellant and the recipient of electricity or between the
appellant and the Electricity Regulatory Commission were inconsequential.” (emphasis added)
12. A Review Petition was filed by the Axis Bank Limited seeking a review of the decision of
Vidarbha Industries1 on the ground that the attention of the Court was not invited to the case of E.S.
Krishnamurthy2. While disposing of Review Petition by Order dated 22 nd September 2022, this
Court held thus:
“The elucidation in paragraph 90 and other paragraphs were made in the context of
the case at hand. It is well settled that judgments and observations in judgments are
not to be read as provisions of statute.
Judicial utterances and/or pronouncements are in the setting of the facts of a
particular case.
To interpret words and provisions of a statute, it may become necessary for the Judges to embark
upon lengthy discussions. The words of Judges interpreting statutes are not to be interpreted as
statutes.” Civil Appeal No. 7121 OF 2022
13. Thus, it was clarified by the order in review that the decision in the case of Vidarbha Industries1
was in the setting of facts of the case before this Court. Hence, the decision in the case of Vidarbha
Industries1 cannot be read and understood as taking a view which is contrary to the view taken in
the cases of Innoventive Industries3 and E.S. Krishnamurthy2. The view taken in the case of
Innoventive Industries3 still holds good.
14. In this case, we must note that the amount payable by the Corporate Debtor also included the
amount repayable under fund−based credit facility of secured overdrafts. The facility granted to the
Corporate Debtor was not confined to Bank Guarantees.
15. Moreover, a demand notice under Section 13(2) of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of
Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 dated 29 th August 2018 was
issued by the first respondent. As the Corporate Debtor did not honour the said notice, the original
application for recovery has been filed by the first respondent before the Debt Recovery Tribunal at
Hyderabad. Moreover, the Corporate Debtor acknowledged the debt on 5th May 2019 to the extent
of Rs.
Civil Appeal No. 7121 OF 2022 63,36,61,897.26. Moreover, the Balance Sheet as of 31.03.2019 of the
Corporate Debtor reflects the said liability of the Corporate Debtor.
16. It is true that as far as Bank Guarantees are concerned, the Executive Engineer of the
Government of Telangana addressed letters to the Bank requesting the Bank to revalidate the Bank
M. Suresh Kumar Reddy vs Canara Bank on 11 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131399423/
7
Guarantees. On 8th January 2020, the Government addressed a letter to Syndicate Bank to extend
the seven Bank Guarantees mentioned therein. The letter mentions that if the action of revalidation
or extension of the Bank Guarantees is not taken, the Bank Guarantees be realized and the amount
be paid by Demand Drafts to the State Government. Thus, Bank Guarantees were invoked by the
State Government. In view of the said letter, on 9th January 2020, the Corporate Debtor addressed
a letter to the Syndicate Bank mentioning that the issue relating to the pre−closure of the two
contracts granted by the State Government was under the active consideration of the State
Government. The letter mentions that if the Bank Guarantees were not extended, the same are likely
to be encashed by the Government. Therefore, a request was made by the Corporate Debtor to the
Bank to revalidate the Bank Guarantees. However, the first Civil Appeal No. 7121 OF 2022
respondent by a letter dated 18th January 2021, specifically informed the Corporate Debtor that the
competent authority has not considered the proposal of the Corporate Debtor for extending Bank
Guarantees and Secured Overdraft Facilities. By the same letter, the first respondent called upon the
Corporate Debtor to clear the outstanding immediately. Thus, there is no doubt that the Corporate
Debtor committed a default within the meaning of Section 3(12) of the IB Code due to non−payment
of the amounts due to the Bank.
17. There are a large number of Guarantees issued by the Bank. The interim order of the Telangana
High Court does not relate to all Bank Guarantees. Moreover, there is no finding recorded in the
interim order that the Corporate Debtor is not liable to pay the dues. The interim order only
prevents coercive action against the Corporate Debtor.
18. Even assuming that NCLT has the power to reject the application under Section 7 if there were
good reasons to do so, in the facts of the case, the conduct of the appellant is such that no such good
reason existed on the basis of which NCLT could have denied admission of the application under
Section 7.
Civil Appeal No. 7121 OF 2022
19. Hence, we find that there is no merit in the appeal, and the same is, accordingly, dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
……..….……………J.
(Abhay S. Oka) ……...………………J.
(Rajesh Bindal) New Delhi;
May 11, 2023.
Civil Appeal No. 7121 OF 2022
M. Suresh Kumar Reddy vs Canara Bank on 11 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131399423/
8
