Supreme Court of India
Narayanrao Jagobaji Gawande ... vs State Of Maharashtra & Ors on 4 February, 2016
Bench: V. Gopala Gowda, Amitava Roy
               Non-REPORTABLE
                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.870 OF 2016
                  (Arising out of SLP(C) No.25972 of 2009)
NARAYANRAO JAGOBAJI
GOWANDE PUBLIC TRUST                   …APPELLANT
                                   Versus
              THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS.    …RESPONDENTS
                                  WITH
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.871 OF 2016
                  (Arising out of SLP(C) No.25821 of 2008)
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.872 OF 2016
                  (Arising out of SLP(C) No.25841 of 2008)
                      CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 876-877 OF 2016
  (Arising out of SLP (C) Nos.25923-24 of 2008)
                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 873 OF 2016
    (Arising out of SLP (C) No.427 of 2009)
                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 874 OF 2016
    (Arising out of SLP (C) No.1223 of 2009)
And
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.875 OF 2016
    (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 10246 of 2009)
                               J U D G M E N T
Delay condoned. Leave granted.
These appeals are directed against the common impugned judgment and order dated 29.8.2008
passed by the Division Bench of High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Nagpur Bench, Nagpur in
various Writ Petitions including Writ Petition No.1034 of 1995, wherein the High Court has
dismissed all the writ petitions.
Narayanrao Jagobaji Gawande ... vs State Of Maharashtra & Ors on 4 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113126923/
1
As all the appeals raise the same question of law, for the sake of convenience and brevity, we would
refer to the facts from the appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25972 of 2009. Brief facts are stated
hereunder to appreciate the rival legal contentions urged on behalf of both the parties:
On 01.01.1937, the Nagpur Improvement Trust Act, 1936 (hereinafter referred to as the “NIT Act”)
came into force under which the Nagpur Improvement Trust (hereinafter referred as “NIT”) was
established and incorporated to provide for improvement and expansion of Nagpur Town.
The State of Maharashtra vide notification dated 29.06.1939 sanctioned a Civil Station Expansion
Scheme of 1939 of the NIT.
On 28.02.1942, one Smt. Laxmibai Gawande, wife of Narayanrao Gawande purchased a piece of
land, measuring 3.59 acres, comprised in Khasra no. 65, Mouza Ajni, Nagpur by a registered deed
from Vithoba Fakira Teli. On 27.04.1944, she executed a Release Deed in favour of her husband
Narayanrao Gawande whereby he became the absolute owner of the said land.
It is an undisputed fact that the land in question fell within the Civil Station Expansion Scheme of
1939 of NIT.
On 11.11.1968, Mr. Narayanrao Gawande applied to respondent no.2-NIT for the development of his
said open space land and gave an undertaking whereby he agreed to have the layout of the land
formed as per the plans, suggestions and directions of respondent no.2-NIT. In this connection, a
development agreement was executed on the same day between Narayanrao Gawande and the NIT,
whereby NIT permitted him to develop the said land in a planned way in accordance with the
approved scheme and as per the sanctioned layout plan. In the said layout plan, an area was
reserved for primary school, which was a public utility land.
After the death of Narayanrao Gawande, the appellant-Narayanrao Jagobaji Gawande Public Trust
(hereinafter called the “appellant-trust”) was created and the said land became the property of this
trust. On 21.02.1985, a development agreement was executed between the appellant-trust and the
NIT for ratifying the earlier development agreement dated 11.11.1968 which included the sanctioned
map/plan showing the land reserved for primary school/public utility purpose. Under the said
agreement, the appellant- trust was permitted to develop the layout subject to various conditions
including the following one:
“Whereas the said Party No.2 shall agree to transfer the land and or primary school/open land in the
said layout at free of cost for Party No.1 before release of plots and Party No.1 shall be free to dispose
of this land as per its rules and regulations.” The above Clause contained in the said development
agreement (hereinafter called the “impugned clause”) provides for the transfer of the land
earmarked for the primary school or other public utility purposes, after its development in favour of
respondent no.2-NIT without payment of any compensation to the land owners.
Respondent no.1- State vide its order dated 05.8.1993 sanctioned the allotment of land from out of
Khasra no. 41/1 and 45 Mouza Somalwada, Nagpur in favour of respondent no.3-Santaji
Narayanrao Jagobaji Gawande ... vs State Of Maharashtra & Ors on 4 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113126923/
2
Mahavidyalaya for the construction of a senior college. Pursuant to the aforementioned sanction,
respondent no. 2-NIT allotted a piece of land in B.D. Thapar layout to Respondent no.3-Santaji
Mahavidyalaya. On 25.02.1994 respondent no.3 requested respondent no.2-NIT for a change in
location of the allotted plot for the construction of said senior college. The respondent no.2-NIT, by
its resolution allotted a land, measuring 1907.65sq.m, comprised in Narayanrao Gawande layout to
respondent no.3 in exchange of land.
Feeling aggrieved by the action of allotment of land, comprised in Narayanrao Gawande layout,
taken by respondent no.2-NIT, the appellant- trust approached the High Court by filing Writ
Petition No. 1034 of 1995. Some other writ petitions were also filed by the aggrieved parties. In the
said Writ Petitions, the aforesaid action of respondent no.2-NIT was challenged on the ground of
being without jurisdiction and authority of law and also being contrary to the provisions of the NIT
Act. The High Court vide its common judgment and order dated 29.08.2008 has dismissed all the
Writ Petitions on the ground that the respondent no.2-NIT is free to allot the land by following due
procedure of law for public utility purpose. It neither found arbitrariness nor illegality in the
aforesaid action of the respondent no.2-NIT in allotting the said public utility land as reserved in the
sanctioned layout plan. Hence, these appeals have been filed urging various grounds questioning the
correctness of the common impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court.
Mr. Shekhar Naphade, the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant-trust
contended that the impugned clause in the development agreement dated 21.02.1985, referred to
supra, which provides for the transfer of developed land by the land owners to NIT free of cost and
without payment of any compensation, is void and unenforceable in law in the light of the provisions
of Sections 23 and 25 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872. He challenged the said clause of the
development agreement on the ground of it being hit by Section 25 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872
as the said agreement is neither registered under the provisions of the Registration Act nor stamped
as per the provisions of the Bombay Stamp Act. In this regard he placed strong reliance upon the
decision of this Court in the case of Central Inland Water Transport Corpn Ltd & Anr. v. Brojo Nath
Ganguly & Anr[1]. The relevant para 89 cited by the learned senior counsel reads thus:
“89…...The principle deducible from the above discussions on this part of the case is in consonance
with right and reason, intended to secure social and economic justice and conforms to the mandate
of the great equality clause in Article 14. This principle is that the courts will not enforce and will,
when called upon to do so, strike down an unfair and unreasonable contract, or an unfair and
unreasonable clause in a contract, entered into between parties who are not equal in bargaining
power….” He further contended that respondent no.1-State cannot acquire any land by
incorporating a clause like the impugned clause contained in the development agreement, in the
instant case, which has been executed between itself and the land owners to the effect that the land
owners shall transfer the land developed by them for public utility purpose, free of cost and without
getting any compensation from the NIT. In support of the aforesaid contention he placed strong
reliance upon the decisions of this Court in Pt. Chet Ram Vashist v. Municipal Corporation of
Delhi[2] and Yogendra Pal & Ors. v. Municipality, Bhatinda & Ors[3].
Narayanrao Jagobaji Gawande ... vs State Of Maharashtra & Ors on 4 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113126923/
3
It was further contended by him that in view of Section 76 of the NIT Act read with Rule 3 of the NIT
Land Disposal Rules, 1983, respondent no.1- State should not have sanctioned the allotment of land
in favour of respondent no.3. Section 76 of the NIT Act provides for disposal of any land vested in or
acquired by Trust subject to rules, if any, made by the State Government. However, in the present
case, respondent no.2 has allotted a piece of land comprised in Narayanrao Gawande layout in
favour of respondent no.3 when the said piece of land was neither vested in nor acquired by
respondent no.2-NIT.
It was further contended by the learned Senior counsel that the High Court has erred in holding that
the appellant-trust had received consideration for transfer of the said land in the form of benefits.
He further submitted that release of the said land reserved in the layout plan from acquisition and
grant of permission to sub-divide the plots cannot be considered to be a consideration. He further
submitted that the ground as noted above was not taken by respondent no.1 before the High Court
and therefore, the same ought not to have been considered by it.
It was further contended by him that the High Court has failed to appreciate the scope and scheme
of various provisions of NIT Act, particularly Sections 26, 39, 45, 58, 59 and 68.
While contending further, he drew the attention of this Court towards various provisions under
chapter IV of the NIT Act dealing with Improvement Schemes. Section 26 of the NIT Act deals with
the matters to be provided for improvement schemes. Further, Section 27 of the NIT Act provides
for various kinds of improvement schemes which include a street scheme under its clause (d).
Section 31 of the NIT Act specifically deals with Street scheme. Section 31 (2)(a) stipulates that the
Trust can even acquire a land, which in its opinion, is necessary for the execution of a street scheme.
Under Section 44 of the NIT Act, power is given to the State Government to sanction, reject or
return improvement scheme. Once an improvement scheme is sanctioned by the State Government,
a final notification in that regard is issued by it under Section 45 (1)(a) of the NIT Act. He further
submitted that in item 2 of the Schedule appended to the NIT Act it is provided that publication of
notification under the provisions of Sections 39 and 45 of the NIT Act shall have the same effect as a
notification under Sections 4(1) and 6 respectively of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. He further
submitted that it has already come on record that the notification under Section 45 of the NIT Act in
respect of “Ajni Street Scheme”, was published and the entire land covered under the said street
scheme including the land owned by the appellant-trust was under acquisition for the execution of
the said street scheme.
The learned senior counsel further drew the attention of this Court towards Section 58 of the NIT
Act. The aforesaid Section deals with the acquisition by agreement and empowers the Trust to enter
into an agreement with any person for the acquisition, by purchase, lease or exchange of any land
within the area comprised in a sanctioned scheme. He further submitted that Section 58 of NIT Act
does not in any manner provides for opting to acquire a part of the land covered under the scheme
and a part of land being left un-acquired either by agreement or by compulsory acquisition. In the
light of aforesaid, if at all, respondent no.2-NIT intended to acquire the land of the appellant-trust
under the aforesaid Section, it could not have acquired the said land, by development agreement,
without acquiring the entire land (measuring about 13.45 acres). Further, assuming that NIT can
Narayanrao Jagobaji Gawande ... vs State Of Maharashtra & Ors on 4 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113126923/
4
acquire a part of land by agreement under Section 58 of the NIT Act, then it ought to have acquired
the remaining land by compulsory acquisition and nothing like this has happened in the instant
case.
It was further contended by the learned counsel that Section 68 of the NIT Act empowers the Trust
to abandon the acquisition of the land which is subsequently discovered to be unnecessary for the
execution of the scheme on the terms and conditions stipulated therein. He further submitted that
from the perusal of both the provisions of Sections 58 and 68 of the NIT Act, it is clear that the
development agreement in question has been entered into between the parties under Section 68 of
the NIT Act as all the conditions required under the said Section are fulfilled. He fortified his
aforementioned submission by emphasizing upon clause 2(ii)(b) of the development agreement
which reads thus:
“b) If and when any improvement scheme for development of the area in which the aforesaid Kh.
No. 65 of Mouza Ajni is situated is sanctioned by the State Government, the party no. 2 shall be
liable to pay the betterment or abandonment charges which may be assessed on the plots in
accordance with the provisions of the Nagpur Improvement Trust Act.” He further contended that
once a scheme is declared and notification akin to Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 is
issued in this regard, the entire land covered under the scheme has to be acquired by NIT and no
provision of the NIT Act permits the release of any land, partly or wholly, by NIT from acquisition,
except in a case where the said land is subsequently discovered to be unnecessary for the execution
of the scheme as contemplated under Section 68 of the NIT Act which empowers the abandonment
of acquisition. He further submitted that there is no other provision in the NIT Act which empowers
the NIT to release the land on the terms and conditions contained in the development agreement
and particularly the condition contained in the impugned clause. The fact of the matter, in the
instant case, clearly shows that the land of the appellant-trust which was included in the approved
scheme by the State Government was subsequently discovered to be unnecessary for the execution
of the said scheme by the NIT.
It was further contended that a bare perusal of the development agreement reveals that all the terms
and conditions of the development agreement, except the condition contained in the impugned
clause, relate to development of the property. There is no relevance of the condition contained in the
impugned clause with the development purpose as contemplated under sub-section (1) of Section 68
of NIT Act. Therefore, in the light of aforesaid, the NIT does not have any power, whatsoever, to
incorporate such condition in the development agreement, which is not only unilateral but also
unconscionable. Thus, the said condition cannot be made binding upon the appellant-trust and
consequently, the same cannot be enforced against it.
It was further submitted that NIT has no power to acquire, by transfer or otherwise, land de hors the
provisions of the NIT Act in lieu of charging the betterment contribution from the appellant-trust.
He further submitted that Section 68(4) of the NIT Act provides that when an agreement is executed
in pursuance of sub-section (1) to Section 68 of the NIT Act, the proceedings for the acquisition of
land shall be deemed to be abandoned. Section 68(5) of the NIT Act provides that the provisions
contained in Sections 70-74 of the NIT Act shall apply mutatis mutandis for the assessment of
Narayanrao Jagobaji Gawande ... vs State Of Maharashtra & Ors on 4 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113126923/
5
betterment charges, its levy and recovery. Further, as per Section 70 of the said Act, NIT is required
to pass a resolution determining such betterment contribution. Once such a resolution is passed, the
execution of the scheme, by a legal fiction under sub-section (1) to Section 70 of the NIT Act, is
deemed to have been completed and the betterment contribution is then, calculated as per the
procedure prescribed therein. He further submitted that nothing has been placed on record by NIT
to show that any such resolution has been passed assessing the betterment contribution under
Section 70(1) of NIT Act. He further submitted that the development agreement in question itself
provides for the payment of the betterment charges, in future, on such conditions, from such
persons, as may be assessed in accordance with the provisions of the NIT Act. For this purpose, the
clause 2(ii)(b) of the development agreement (supra) stipulates that the appellant-trust shall bind
itself to incorporate a clause in the sale deed of each plot to the effect that the plot is sold subject to
the responsibility of the purchaser to pay betterment charges to NIT in accordance with the
provisions of the NIT Act.
It was further submitted by him that the NIT Act is a self-contained Act and there is no need to place
reliance upon the provisions of Maharashtra Regional & Town Planning Act, 1966 and Nagpur
Corporation Act, 1948. He contended that the High Court has erred in not holding the impugned
clause in the development agreement as void and unenforceable in law as the same is opposed to the
public policy and contrary to law laid down by this Court in various cases.
He further submitted that the finding recorded by the High Court that the terms and conditions of
the development agreement were neither unconscionable nor void and that there was no inequality
of bargaining power between the parties, is completely perverse in the light of the facts and
circumstances of the instant case. He further submitted that respondent no.2-NIT enjoys a
monopoly status as regards the permission to develop the land under the NIT Act. NIT exerts
pressure on such land owners who desire to develop their land and compels them to incorporate
such void and unconscionable clauses in the development agreement executed between itself and
the land owners, like the impugned clause in the instant case.
Per contra, Mr. V. Giri, the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents sought to
justify the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court on the ground that the same is
well founded both on facts and law and is not vitiated in law. Therefore, no interference of this Court
with the impugned judgment is required in exercise of its appellate jurisdiction.
It was contended by Mr. Giri that when the parties entered into development agreement, they were
fully aware of the nature of the transaction, conditions and respective obligations incorporated
therein. On the basis of the same, the appellant-trust has commercially exploited the said land.
There was no objection raised by it at any point of time while entering into such agreement and even
thereafter, when the appellant-trust and such other persons who, based upon the development
agreements got the benefit out of the same. He further submitted that the entire development
agreement has to be read as a whole. It is very clear from the provisions of the Indian Contract Act,
1872 that the consideration of any such agreement is permissible and valid in law and not to defeat
the provisions of any law. The same is neither fraudulent nor opposed to public policy.
Narayanrao Jagobaji Gawande ... vs State Of Maharashtra & Ors on 4 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113126923/
6
It was further contended by the learned senior counsel that there was no inequality of bargaining
power with the appellant-trust at the time of getting the development scheme sanctioned. In this
regard, he placed strong reliance upon the decisions of this Court in Premsingh and Others v. Birbal
and others[4] and Yamunabai Anantrao Adhav v. Anantrao Shivrj Adhav[5] to press upon the point
that there is no need of a court decree to set aside an agreement, like the development agreement in
the instant case (as the impugned clause therein is not void ab initio) especially when the agreement
as well as the clause in question are amply clear and there has been no ambiguity regarding the
same at any point of time. Thus, the terms and conditions of the said development agreement are
binding upon the parties.
It was further contended by him that since the parties have already acted upon the terms and
conditions of the said development agreement, the entire agreement is required to be considered in
totality. He further submitted that there is no justification of reading any clause by severing it in
isolation or in part(s) to examine and consider the legal submissions made on behalf of the
appellant-trust. It was further submitted that it is a well settled principle of law that a party to an
agreement cannot be allowed to approbate and reprobate after availing the benefit from it. In
support of this contention he placed strong reliance upon the decision of this Court in the case of
New Bihar Biri Leaves Co. & Ors v. State of Bihar & Ors[6]. The relevant paragraph 48 cited by him
reads thus: “48. It is a fundamental principle of general application that if a person of his own
accord, accepts a contract on certain terms and works out the contract, he cannot be allowed to
adhere to and abide by some of the terms of the contract which proved advantageous to him and
repudiate the other terms of the same contract which might be disadvantageous to him. The maxim
is qui approbat non reprobat (one who approbates cannot reprobate). This principle, though
originally borrowed from Scots Law, is now firmly embodied in English Common Law. According to
it, a party to an instrument or transaction cannot take advantage of one part of a document or
transaction and reject the rest. That is to say, no party can accept and reject the same instrument or
transaction (Per Scrutton, L.J., Verschures Creameries Ltd. v. Hull & Netherlands Steamship Co.;
see Douglas Menzies v. Umphelby; see also stroud’s judicial dictionary, Vol. I, p. 169, 3rd Edn.)” The
learned senior counsel drew the attention of this Court towards Section 58 of the NIT Act which
reads thus:
“The Trust may enter into an agreement with any person for the acquisition, by purchase, lease or
exchange by the Trust from such person, of any land within the area comprised in the sanctioned
scheme.” It was submitted by him that if the appellant-trust has entered into an agreement with the
NIT, then, the said public utility land can be said to have been acquired by an agreement in view of
the exchange of not implementing the scheme as per the sanctioned notification under Section 45 of
the NIT Act but agreeing to sanction a private layout with regard to land comprised within the
sanctioned scheme of the NIT. Thus, in light of aforesaid, it cannot be said that the public utility
land, which is being transferred to the NIT free of cost, is without any compensation.
On the issue of allotment of land in favour of respondent no.3, it was contended by him that NIT
does not have inherent jurisdiction over any piece of land. The NIT gets ownership of a land through
the procedure as contemplated in the NIT Act. The NIT has been established by the State
Government for the improvement of the city of Nagpur through the implementation of various
Narayanrao Jagobaji Gawande ... vs State Of Maharashtra & Ors on 4 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113126923/
7
improvement schemes. He further submitted that these schemes are framed by NIT from the
matters provided in Section 26 of the NIT Act. These schemes are framed by the NIT and published
by notification under Section 39 of the NIT Act, which is equivalent to notification under Section 4
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. Thereafter, going through the provisions of Section 40,41,42,43
and 44 of the NIT Act, the improvement schemes are sanctioned by the State Government by a
notification issued under Section 45 of the NIT Act, which is equivalent to Section 6 of the Land
Acquisition Act. Section 46 of the NIT Act allows the alteration of improvement schemes after its
sanction. Thus, in the light of aforesaid, he further submitted that the High Court has rightly
concluded that the NIT has a jurisdiction over the areas, which are part and parcel of notification
issued under Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 equivalent to Section 45 of the NIT Act. He
further submitted that the land in question is definitely a part and parcel of the improvement
schemes of the NIT sanctioned by the State Government under the provision of Section 45 of the
NIT Act.
It was further submitted by him that Pt. Chet Ram Vashist and Yogendra Pal cases, referred to
supra, upon which the learned senior counsel on behalf of the appellant-trust has relied upon are of
no relevance to the case in hand as the facts and the circumstances of the instant case differ from the
facts and circumstances of the aforesaid cases.
We have carefully heard both the parties at length and have also given our conscious thought to the
materials on record and the relevant provisions of law. We are of the view that the High Court in its
judgment and order has rightly held that respondent no.1-State and respondent no.2-NIT are bound
to stick to the development plan and scheme. It has placed reliance upon the decision of this Court
in Chairman, Indore Vikas Pradhikaran v. Pure Industrial Coke & Chemicals Ltd. & Ors[7], wherein
this Court, while dealing with the aspect of town planning and Articles 300-A and 14 of the
Constitution of India, has observed as under:
“………The courts must make an endeavour to strike a balance between the public interest on the one
hand and protection of a constitutional right to hold property, on the other. For the aforementioned
purpose, an endeavour should be made to find out as to whether the statute takes care of public
interest in the matter vis-à-vis the private interest, on the one hand, and the effect of lapse and/or
positive inaction on the part of the State and other planning authorities, on the other.” Further, the
High Court has rightly held thus:
“NIT or such other local authority needs to consider the purpose, Scheme, development plan and the
circular issued from time to time by striking a balance of public and private interest. The petitioners
are bound by the agreement and undertaking as given. In fact, both the parties are bound by the
agreements. In totality the permissible action of respondent NIT is within the frame of law and the
record. There is no substance in these petitions.” The High Court has, further, rightly held that the
impugned clause contained in the said development agreement is neither void nor illegal for want of
consideration. It has also been rightly held by it that after consideration of whole scheme of the NIT
Act, particularly, provisions under Sections 29 to 70 and 121 of the said Act read with the terms and
conditions of the said development agreement entered into between the parties, it is clear that the
said development agreement creates reciprocal rights and obligations between the parties with some
Narayanrao Jagobaji Gawande ... vs State Of Maharashtra & Ors on 4 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113126923/
8
objects. The aforesaid objects as cited by the High Court in its judgment and order read thus:
“(a)Abandonment of the land from acquisition of NIT.
(b)Permission to develop the said land and sanction of a scheme of a layout therein,
(c)Entrustment of the job of supervision of such development on NIT,
(d)Transfer of the public utility land, reserved in the said layout to the NIT.
(e)Immediate and reciprocal permission to develop the land by making a layout in the said land and
permission to sell plots therein, i.e. permission for commercial exploitation of the land.” Thus,
seeking abandonment of acquisition of the land as provided under Section 68 of the NIT Act is a
huge benefit which the appellant-trust has gained from the agreement. Further, it is not open for the
appellant-trust to avail only the beneficial part of the said development agreement to form a layout
plan and allow the sites to be allotted in favour of allottees, when it itself is not willing to discharge
the obligation of transferring the reserved land for public utility purpose, as agreed upon in the
development agreement.
Further the High Court has rightly observed that another benefit derived by the appellant-trust from
the said development agreement is immediate and reciprocal sanction for the development of the
said land with permission for the commercial usage of the same, presuming that there would be no
acquisition.
This Court is of the view that the High Court has rightly held that the impugned clause in the
development agreement is neither void nor opposed to the public policy. The High Court has held
thus:
“42.When the parties entered into agreement, they were fully aware of the nature of transaction,
conditions and respective obligations. There was no objection raised at any point of time while
entering into such agreement and even thereafter when petitioners and such other persons who
based upon the said agreement got the benefit out of the same. We cannot read the clauses in
isolation. We have to read the whole agreement in question. It is very clear even from the provisions
of the Contract Act that the consideration of any such agreement was permissible and not unlawful
and/or not prohibited by law and was not to defeat the provisions of any law or is fraudulent and/or
is immoral or opposed to public policy.
43.The submissions, that such contract and especially the clause is void, in view of provisions
contained under Section 23/25 of the Indian Contract Act being opposed to public policy; violative
of fundamental rights of the petitioner; violative of the right of property of petitioner/society;
because of unequal bargain power; being forbidden by law and further in view of Section 25 of the
Contract Act, as the agreement to transfer is without consideration and the same was not registered,
have no force.” In view of the findings and reasons recorded by the High Court in the Central Inland
Water Transport Corpn Ltd & Anr case (supra) upon which the reliance was placed by the learned
senior counsel for the appellant-trust is of no relevance to the fact situation.
Narayanrao Jagobaji Gawande ... vs State Of Maharashtra & Ors on 4 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113126923/
9
Further, it has been rightly held by the High Court that the appellant- trust has accepted and acted
upon the said development agreement like other beneficiaries who are either the societies or other
similar persons who are benefited by the approved scheme of the NIT. It is noteworthy that the
appellant-trust has accepted all the terms and conditions of the development agreement without any
objection while executing the same. The impugned clause of the said development agreement
provides for the transfer of land in favour of NIT which is earmarked in the layout for the public
utility purpose. The same is in terms of the approved development plan by Maharashtra
Government and as per the provisions of the Maharashtra Regional & Town Planning Act, 1966
contained in its Chapter-V i.e., Sections 59-112 and Nagpur Corporation Act, 1948.
The findings recorded on the relevant contentious issues by the High Court in the impugned
judgment with cogent and valid reasons are legal and justifiable. Therefore, we do not find any valid
reason, whatsoever, to interfere with the said impugned judgment and order as the same, in our
opinion, is a well-considered and reasoned decision. The same does not suffer from erroneous
reasoning or error in law which requires interference by this Court.
For the reasons stated supra, the civil appeals are dismissed. The order dated 01.10.2009 granting
status quo shall stands vacated.
…………………………………………………………J.
[V. GOPALA GOWDA] ……………………………………………………….J.
                      [AMITAVA ROY]
New Delhi,
February 4, 2016
ITEM NO.1B-For Judgment         COURT NO.9               SECTION IX
               S U P R E M E  C O U R T  O F  I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Civil Appeal 870/2016 @ SLP (C) No(s).  25972/2009
NARAYANRAO JAGOBAJI GAWANDE PUB.TRUST              Appellant(s)
                                VERSUS
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ORS.                        Respondent(s)
WITH
C.A. No. 871/2016 @ SLP (C) No(s).  25821/2008
 C.A. No. 872/2016 @ SLP (C) No(s).  25841/2009
Narayanrao Jagobaji Gawande ... vs State Of Maharashtra & Ors on 4 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113126923/
10
C.A. No. 876-877/2016 @ SLP (C) No(s).25923-25924/2008 C.A. No. 873/2016 @ SLP (C) No(s).
427/2009 C.A. No. 874/2016 @ SLP (C) No(s). 1223/2009 C.A. No. 875/2016 @ SLP (C) No(s).
10246/2009 Date : 04/02/2016 These appeals were called on for pronouncement of JUDGMENT
today.
For Appellant(s) Mr. Rameshwar Prasad Goyal,Adv.
Mr. Manish Pitale, Adv.
Ms. Deeplaxmi S. Matwankar, Adv.
Mr. Chander Shekhar Ashri,Adv.
Mr. Shivaji M. Jadhav,Adv.
For Respondent(s)       Mr. Satyajit A. Desai, Adv.
                     Ms. Anagha S. Desai,Adv.
                     Mr. Vimal Chandra S. Dave,Adv.
                     Mr. A. Venayagam Balan,Adv.
             Mr. Kunal A. Cheema, Addl. Govt. Adv.
             Mr. Nishant Katneshwarkar, Govt. Adv.
             Mr. Yogesh Ahirrao, Adv.
            Mr. Siddhesh Kotwal, Adv.
            Ms. Shreya Bhatnagar, Adv.
            Mr. Raghunatha S., Adv.
            Mr. Nirnimesh Dubey, Adv.
Hon'ble Mr. Justice V.Gopala Gowda pronounced the judgment of the Bench comprising His
Lordship and Hon'ble Mr. Justice Amitava Roy.
Delay condoned.
Leave granted.
The appeals are dismissed in terms of the signed Non-Reportable Judgment.
The order dated 01.10.2009 granting status quo shall stands vacated.
|(VINOD KUMAR)                          | |(CHANDER BALA)                        |
|COURT MASTER                           | |COURT MASTER                          |
Narayanrao Jagobaji Gawande ... vs State Of Maharashtra & Ors on 4 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113126923/
11
(Signed Non-Reportable judgment is placed on the file)
-----------------------
[1] [2] (1986) 3 SCC 156 [3] [4] (1995) 1 SCC 47 [5] [6] (1994) 5 SCC 709 [7] [8] (2006) 5 SCC 353
[9] [10] (1988) 1 SCC 530 [11] [12] (1981) 1 SCC 537 [13] [14] (2007) 8 SCC 705
Narayanrao Jagobaji Gawande ... vs State Of Maharashtra & Ors on 4 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113126923/
12
