Supreme Court of India
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Author: Dinesh Maheshwari
Bench: Dinesh Maheshwari, Aravind Kumar
                                                                                        
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8015 OF 2010
                OFFICIAL LIQUIDATOR                                                ….APP
                                                               VERSUS
                UJJAIN NAGAR PALIKA NIGAM & ORS.                                  ….RESP
                                                                WITH
                                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8016 OF 2010
                                                            JUDGMENT
DINESH MAHESHWARI, J.
1. By way of these appeals, the appellant, being Official Liquidator1 of the company named IISCO
Ujjain Pipe and Foundry Company Limited2, has questioned the common judgment and order
dated 05.02.2009 in APOT No. 248 of 2008 and APOT No. 235 of 2008, whereby the Division
Bench of the High Court at Calcutta has dismissed the appeals against the common judgment and
order dated 25.04.2007 in C.A. No. 159 of 2006 and C.A. No. 160 of 2006, as passed by the learned
Company Judge of the High Court3 in allowing the company applications preferred by Signature
Not Verified Digitally signed by ARJUN BISHT Date: 2023.05.04 17:54:01 IST Reason:
1 ‘OL’, for short.
2 Hereinafter also referred to as ‘the company in liquidation’. 3 Hereinafter also
referred to as ‘the Company Court’.
respondent No.1 Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam4, claiming property tax and water tax from the
appellant in relation to the company in liquidation, from the date of order of winding up and until
the date of confirmation of sale of assets to the auction purchaser, who is now represented by
respondent No. 3.
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
1
2. Briefly put, the relevant facts are that the said company, IISCO Ujjain Pipe and Foundry Company
Limited, became sick and was referred to the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction 5
under the provisions of Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1956. The BIFR
recommended its winding up and, accordingly, it was ordered to be wound up by the Company
Court in its order dated 10.07.1997. The appellant herein was appointed as the Official Liquidator
and was directed to take over possession of the assets of the company in liquidation.
3. Following an order passed by the Company Court on 04.04.2003, the assets of the company in
liquidation were put up for sale on “as is where is whatever there is” basis by means of sale notice
dated 09.05.2003. The said notice provided for inspection of the assets of the company by intending
purchasers and mentioned the availability of terms and conditions of sale alongwith particulars
about the assets of the company at the office of the appellant. This sale notice reads as under: -
“SALE NOTICE Pursuant to the order of the Hon'ble High Court, Calcutta dated 4th
April, 2003 offers are invited in sealed cover enclosing a Bank Draft or Pay Order in
favour of Official Liquidator, High Court, Calcutta for an amount equivalent to 20%
of the offered amount as 4 Hereinafter also referred to as ‘the Nigam’.
5 For Short, ‘BIFR’.
earnest money for sale of the assets of the Company [In Liqn.] like land structure, building,
machineries etc., lying at Dewas Road, Ujjain M.P., and lease hold land building quarter at
Nana-Kheda, Indore road, Ujjain, M.P. The assets of the company will be sold 'as is where is
whatever there is basis'. Balance amount is to be paid within 30 days from the date of sale and the
possession is not be made only after full payment of the purchase price.
Sealed offers will be received by the Official Liquidator upon 5 p.m. dated 26th June 2003 and the
same will be opened on 27th June 2003 at 2.00 p.m. before the Hon'ble Judge taking Company
matters in the High Court at Calcutta for consideration of such sealed offers. No one will be allowed
to purchase in favour of nominee or nominees.
Inspection of the assets of the Company [In liqn.] will be allowed to the intending purchasers on
26th May 2003 and 27th May 2003 between 12 noon to 4 p.m. Terms and conditions of sale
alongwith the particulars of the assets of the Company [In Liquidation] will be available at the office
of the undersigned on and from 22 nd May 2003 during office hours at a cost of Rs.50/- per
catalogue and also at site during inspection period.
Dated this 9th day of May, 2003.” 3.1. The abovementioned sale notice carried certain terms and
conditions appended to it, reinforcing that the sale would be on “as is where is whatever there is”
basis and stating that the appellant OL would not be providing any guarantee about the quality,
quantity or specification of the assets sold; the tenderers were to satisfy themselves in this regard
after physical inspection of the assets of the company; and the purchasers would be deemed to offer
with full knowledge as to defects, if any, in the description, quality or quantity of the assets sold. The
conditions relevant for the present purpose could be reproduced as follows: -
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
2
“TERMS & CONDITIONS OF THE SALE
1. The SALE will be as per inventory made by the valuer on 'As is where is whatever
there is' basis subject to the confirmation by the Hon'ble Court, The Official
Liquidator shall not provide any guarantee and/or warranty as to quality, quantity or
specification of the assets sold. The Tenderers/ bidders are to satisfy themselves in
this regard after physical inspection of the assets of the company and the purchasers
will be deemed to offer with full knowledge as to defects, if any, in the description,
quality or quantity of the assets sold. The Official Liquidator, shall not entertain any
complaint in this regard after the sale is over. Any mistake in the notice inviting
tender shall not vitiate the sale.
………..” 3.2. Pursuant to the aforementioned sale notice, the assets were sold to one Nagendra Jain
for a sum of Rs. 20.50 crore; and the sale was confirmed by the order of Company Court dated
04.07.2003. Subsequently, the respondent No. 3 was nominated in the place and stead of the said
Nagendra Jain as purchaser of the assets and properties of the company in liquidation.
4. After the sale of assets, the appellant OL invited claims from the creditors of the company in
liquidation by way of advertisements. 4.1. In response to such invitation of claims, the respondent
No. 1 Nigam filed affidavit of proof of debt with the appellant, claiming towards arrears of property
tax a sum of Rs. 2,79,955/- for the year 1996-1997 and another sum of Rs. 4,63,69,137/- for the
years 1997-1998 till 2003-2004, for the factory and staff quarters of the company in liquidation at
Ujjain. The respondent No. 1 Nigam also filed another affidavit of proof of debts with the appellant
to the tune of Rs. 11,14,612/- as arrears of water tax for the period from 01.06.1996 to 31.10.2005.
4.2. In response to the claims so filed by the respondent No. 1 Nigam, the appellant OL issued four
notices dated 24.01.2006. By way of two such notices, the appellant admitted the claims to the tune
of Rs. 2,79,955/- on account of property tax and Rs. 2,162.20 on account of water tax against the
company in liquidation only to the extent of pre-liquidation period i.e., prior to the date of order of
winding up by the Company Court (10.07.1997). However, by way of other two notices issued on
even date, the appellant rejected the claim of respondent No. 1 to the extent of Rs. 4,63,69,137/-
towards property tax and Rs. 11,12,449.80 towards water tax on the ground that such claims arose
after the date of order of winding up i.e., 10.07.1997.
5. In challenge to the part rejection of its claim, the respondent No. 1 Nigam preferred two company
applications before the Company Court at Calcutta by Judge’s Summons under Rule 164 of the
Companies (Court) Rules, 19596, particularly as regards admissibility of post-liquidation claims.
6. For deciding the applications so preferred by the respondent No.1, the Company Court framed the
following question for adjudication: -
“The question before this Court is whether claims, that might arise against the
Official Liquidator representing the company in liquidation, for any period of time,
subsequent to the order of winding up, can outright be rejected.” 6.1. It was
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
3
contended on behalf of respondent No. 1 Nigam - applicant before the Company
Court - that the OL was liable for both pre-liquidation and post-liquidation rates and
taxes; that as per Section 185 of the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act,
19567 the position of respondent No. 1 was that of a secured creditor; and that in any
case, the OL was required to give reasons for rejection of claim which he had not
done. A reference was also made to Rule 163 of the Rules of 1959.
6.2. Similarly, it was contended on behalf of respondent No.3 auction purchaser, while placing
reliance on the said Section 185 of the M.P. Act 6 Hereinafter also referred to as ‘the Rules of 1959’. 7
Hereinafter also referred to as ‘the M.P. Act of 1956’. of 1956, that he was not liable towards such
taxes prior to the date on which he occupied the property; and that the OL was liable to pay all taxes
till the execution of deed of conveyance in favour of the purchaser. 6.3. On the other hand, it was
contended on of behalf the appellant OL that he was liable to pay only those taxes which accrued till
the date of winding up and became payable within one year thereof; that in view of Section 529A of
the Companies Act, 19568, workmen’s dues and the dues of secured creditors to the extent they were
secured, were to be paid pari passu, and prioritised over all other debts; and that Rule 154 of the
Rules of 1959 provided for filing of affidavit of proof of debts as on relevant date and the appellant
had allowed taxes due on the relevant date that had been proved.
7. In the common judgment and order dated 25.04.2007, the Company Court, while allowing the
applications so filed by the respondent No. 1 Nigam, held that liability of the appellant OL was not
restricted to the claims and debts only until the date of order of winding up. 7.1. The Company Court
further held that reliance placed by the appellant OL on Section 530 of the Companies Act and Rule
154 of the Rules of 1959 was patently misconceived, while observing that there was no provision in
either of them which restricted the claim only until the date of order of winding up. It was also held
that Section 530 of the Companies Act would not absolve a company in liquidation of its liability
towards revenue and taxes; and that such liabilities in the post-liquidation period 8 Hereinafter
referred to as ‘the Companies Act’.
were to be treated as a part of the cost of winding up and would be prioritised over all other
liabilities. As regards the auction purchaser, the Company Court relied upon a decision of the
Bombay High Court holding that the purchaser was liable to pay property tax only from date of
purchase. The Company Court observed and held, inter alia, as under: -
“The company may be wound up and its business closed down. Yet, the Official
Liquidator would be obliged to protect the assets of the company in liquidation, until
such time as the assets are sold. For the protection of assets, the Official Liquidator
representing the company might have to retain rented premises, obtain supply of
electricity, engage security guards and take such other steps involving expenses as the
Official Liquidator might deem necessary. Can claims on account of inter alia rent,
electricity charges that accrued after the date of winding up, be outright rejected only
on the ground that the claims were post liquidation claims even though the company
in liquidation might have sufficient funds to satisfy the claims?
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
4
An electricity supplier, may, as argued by Mr. Ghosh, have the option of
disconnecting supply for non-payment of its dues and appropriating the security
deposit of the consumer. The right of disconnection would not, however, make any
difference to the maintainability of the claim of the supplier.
It is not in dispute that the Official Liquidator has been making payment of post
liquidation electricity charges. The compulsion to make payment cannot, however,
make any difference to the legal status of the claim.
If charges on account of supply of electricity after the date of liquidation are payable,
so is rent. The liability of a company to pay rent and/or occupation charges and/or
rates and taxes does not automatically come to an end with the order of winding up of
the company.
**** **** **** The dispute between the Official Liquidator and the applicant is with
regard to the rates and taxes for the period between 10th July, 1997 being the date on
which the company was directed to be wound-up and 4th July, 2003 being the date
on which the sale in favour of the purchaser was confirmed. In other words, the
dispute is with regard to the taxes claimed for a period of approximately six years.
The Official Liquidator has rejected the proof of debt on his interpretation of the various provisions
of the Companies Act and the Company (Court) Rules framed thereunder and in particular Section
528, 529A and 530 and Rule 154 of the Rules.
**** **** **** The contention on behalf of the Official Liquidator, that debts and claims and
particularly claims on account of municipal tax are payable only till the date of winding up of the
company, in view of Section 530 of the Companies Act, 1956, read with Rule 154 of the Companies
(Court) Rules 1959, is patently misconceived. There is no provision either in the Companies Act or in
the Companies (Court) Rules which restricts claims and debts only till the date of the winding up
order.
Pre-liquidation claims, which had arisen before the Official Liquidator took possession of the assets
and properties of the company, would necessarily have to be estimated by the Official Liquidator on
the basis of available records and the proof adduced by the claimant and/or creditor. Post
liquidation debts and claims do not require to be proved.
Section 530 does not absolve a company in liquidation, represented by the Official Liquidator, of its
liability towards revenue and taxes. The said Section merely provides for payment of revenues,
taxes, cesses and rates which became due and payable within 12 months from the relevant date,
being the date of the winding up order in priority to other pre-liquidation debts. Post liquidation
liabilities are to be treated as part of the costs of winding up of the company in liquidation and such
liabilities get priority over all other liabilities of the company.
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
5
**** **** **** In winding up, liquidators who carry on the company's business continue with
rateable occupation of the premises and they are in rateable occupation even if they occupy merely
for the purpose of fulfilling the outstanding contracts or preventing damage to the company's
property (Halsbury Laws of England, 4th Edn., Vol.39). It is true that the Official Liquidator did not
carry on any business on behalf of the company. The Official Liquidator, however, retained
possession for beneficial winding up of the company. As rightly argued by Mr. Mukherjee, appointed
as amicus curiae by this Court, and by Mr. Banerjee, appearing on behalf of the applicant, the
expenses incurred in winding up are payable, not provable. The principle of priority of certain
creditors is applicable to liability of the company at the time when the order for winding up of the
company was made. Costs and expenses incurred on behalf of the company, in winding up ought to
have paid in full.” 7.2. The Company Court also took note of the fact that the appellant OL had
rejected the claims only on the ground that he was not liable to pay post-liquidation expenses but
had neither objected to the determination of annual value nor filed any appeal under Section 184 of
the M.P. Act of 1956. The Court observed that unless an objection or appeal was filed and the
demand was reduced, the OL would be bound to discharge the tax liability, as per the claim of the
Nigam, even for post-liquidation period. Therefore, the Court set aside the rejection notice by the
appellant but extended him liberty to file an appeal against the demands, if so chosen, within thirty
days and also provided that the appellant would, within eight weeks from the date of receipt of the
order in appeal under Section 184 of the M.P. Act of 1956, consider and dispose of the claims of the
applicant (respondent No. 1), as determined in appeal and in accordance with law.
8. The appellant challenged the aforesaid judgment and order dated 25.04.2007 of the Company
Court by way of appeals before the Division Bench of the High Court but, the appeals came to be
dismissed by the impugned judgment and order dated 05.02.2009.
8.1. The appellant OL contended before the Division Bench that he had not carried on any business
of the company and consequently, did not in any way earn profit from use of the assets of the
company in liquidation; that the provisions of the Companies Act did not envisage payment of post-
liquidation taxes on property and water and the assets were only custodia legis after the winding up
order until the sale; and that the sale was on “as is where is whatever there is” basis, which would
mean that the assets were not free from encumbrances when sold and thereby, the liability of taxes
was shifted to the purchaser.
8.2. The respondent No. 1 Nigam contended that the appellant would be liable to pay taxes to the
Nigam out of sale proceeds, and apart from this, reiterated the submissions made before the
Company Court. Similarly, the auction purchaser, respondent No. 3, submitted that he was neither
the owner nor the occupier until 04.07.2003 when the sale was confirmed and, therefore, there
would be a shift of the charge to the sale proceeds and not to the purchaser. However, a creditor of
the company, respondent No. 2, contended that the claim towards arrears of property and water tax
would be directed against the auction purchaser and not the OL. 8.3. The Division Bench did not
accept the submissions of appellant and respondent No. 2 and held that respondent No. 3 - the
auction purchaser – was not liable to pay the said charges accrued post-liquidation because, from
the terms and conditions of sale, it could not be discerned that the purchaser was put to notice about
any liability towards arrears due to the Nigam. The Division Bench held that in absence of clear
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
6
provision in the sale notice that intending purchaser had to satisfy himself as regards assets of
company in liquidation in all respects including encumbrances, the appellant was obliged to
discharge the post-liquidation liability towards property and water taxes; and that it would not be
reasonable to fasten liability on a purchaser without informing him about the encumbrances prior to
the sale. The Division Bench also distinguished the decision of this Court in the case of United Bank
of India v. Official Liquidator and Ors.: 79 Company Cases 262 [= (1994) 1 SCC 575] while taking
note of the peculiar factual matrix and specific terms and conditions of sale in that case. After
making a comparison between the terms and conditions of sale in the present case and those of sale
in the aforesaid case, it was observed that sale notice in the present case was not couched in similar
and comprehensive language and there was no occasion for respondent No. 3 to make himself aware
about the encumbrances, if any, in respect of assets of the company in liquidation, which he
intended to purchase. 8.4. As regards the applicability of Section 530 of the Companies Act, the
Division Bench observed that the said provision had nothing to do with payment of taxes which
might have mounted between the date of the order of winding up and the date of the sale of its
assets. Similarly, Rule 154 of the Rules of 1959, providing for the manner of estimation of value of
debts and claims on the date of the order of winding up of the company was held to be of no
application.
8.5. The Division Bench of the High Court observed and held as under:-
“There is no express provision in the sale notice that the liability to bear charges on
account of water and property taxes must be borne by the purchaser. We are unable
to comprehend that the expression “as is where is whatever there is basis” comprises
within its ambit the liability to clear statutory charges as might have accrued and are
in arrears. The terms and conditions of the sale do specify that the Official Liquidator
shall not provide any guarantee and/or warranty as to quality, quantity or
specification of the assets sold and the intending purchaser is required to satisfy
himself in this regard after physical inspection of the assets of the company in
liquidation and no complaint as to defects, if any, in the description, quality or
quantity of the assets sold would be entertained after the sale is over and that any
mistake in the notice inviting tender shall not vitiate the sale. These, per se, in our
opinion, would not tantamount to a representation being made to an intending
purchaser that while bidding for the assets put up for sale he is also to bear the
expenses towards arrear dues of the Nigam. Guarantee and/or warranty as to quality,
quantity or specification of the assets sold cannot be equated with the liability
attached to the same. The terms and conditions of the tender only protect the Official
Liquidator to the extent of quality, quantity and specification and would not extend
to claiming of immunity to clear taxes claimed by the Nigam.
The Official Liquidator has laid much stress on Section 530 of the Companies Act and Rule 154 of
the Companies (Court) Rules. We have failed to find the materiality of the said provisions for a
decision on the present dispute. Section 530 provides for preferential payments. According to clause
(a) of sub-section (1) of Section 530 read with clause (c) of sub-section (8) thereof, all revenues,
taxes etc. due from the company in liquidation to a local authority on the date of the winding up
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
7
order and having become due and payable during the preceding 12 months thereof would be entitled
to priority over all other dues. Section 530 has nothing to do with payment of taxes which might
have mounted between the date of winding up and sale of its assets by the purchaser. Rule 154 also
cannot have any manner of application since it provides the manner of estimation of value of debts
and claims on the date of the order of winding up of the company.
It would be, in our opinion, thoroughly unreasonable to foist the liability on a purchaser without
first letting him know prior to the sale about such liability. Enquiries at site must have been made by
the ultimate purchaser before he offered his bid. The purchaser could have been informed there of
the encumbrances. He could have also been told about it prior to his depositing the balance sale
consideration. The proceedings before the Company Court were decided without giving any
opportunity to the Official Liquidator to file counter affidavits to the applications filed by the Nigam,
as it appears from the stay petitions. We, however, find no averment in the stay petitions to the
effect that after the respondent no.3 had expressed interest to purchase the assets of the company in
liquidation, the Official Liquidator had made him aware that purchase of such assets would carry
with it the liability to pay arrear taxes recoverable by the Nigam. In the absence of such an
averment, we find it difficult to hold that the respondent no.3 ought to bear the liability instead of
the Official Liquidator. At this stage, it would be worthwhile to consider the decision of the Apex
Court in United Bank of India (supra) cited by Mr. Ghosh. The Official Liquidator, in that case, had
sold the assets of the company in liquidation on the basis of Terms and Conditions of Sale to Triputi
Jute Industries. Clause (2) of such terms and conditions was as follows:
“2. The sale will be as per inventory list on ‘as is where is basis’ and subject to the
confirmation of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India. The Official Liquidator shall not
provide any guarantee and/or warranty in respect of the immovable properties and
as to the quality, quantity or specification of the movable assets. The intending
purchaser must satisfy themselves in all respect as regards the movable and
immovable assets, as to their title, encumbrances, area, boundary, description,
quality, quantity, and volume etc. and the purchaser will be deemed to offer with full
knowledge as to the description, area etc. of the properties and defects thereof, if any.
The purchaser shall not be entitled to claim any compensation or deduction in price
on any account whatsoever and shall be deemed to have purchased the property
subject to all encumbrances, liens and claims including those under the existing
legislation affecting labour, staff etc. The Official Liquidator shall not entertain any
complaint in this regard after the sale is over. Any mistake in the notice inviting
tender shall not vitiate the sale.” It was on consideration of the express provisions of
clause (2) of the Terms and Conditions of Sale that the Apex Court proceeded to hold
as under:
“When the Official Liquidator sells the property and assets of a company in
liquidation under the orders of the Court he cannot and does not hold out any
guarantee or warranty in respect thereof. This is because he must proceed upon the
basis of what the records of the company in liquidation show. It is for the intending
purchaser to satisfy himself in all respects as to the title, encumbrances and so forth
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
8
of the immovable property that he proposes to purchase. He cannot after having
purchased the property on such terms then claim diminution in the price on the
ground of defect in title or description of the property. The case of the Official
Liquidator selling the property of a company in liquidation under the orders of the
Court is altogether different from the case of an individual selling immovable
property belonging to himself. There is, therefore, no merit in the application made
on behalf of Triputi that there should be a diminution in price or that it should not be
made liable to pay interest on the sum of Rs 1 crore 98 lakhs”.
It is understandable that once an intending purchaser is warned to satisfy himself in
all respects as regards the immovable assets as in the said case, it is for his own
benefit that he satisfies himself in all respects including encumbrances of the
immovable property that he proposes to purchase. It is also quite understandable
that after having purchased the property on such terms any objection that he was not
aware of the encumbrances may not be entertained.
However, it passes the comprehension of this Court as to why the sale notice in the present case was
not couched in similar and comprehensive language as the one which fell for consideration before
the Apex Court. There being no occasion for the respondent no.3 to make himself aware regarding
the encumbrances, if any, in respect of assets of the company in liquidation which he proposed to
purchase, it is too late in the day for the Official Liquidator to contend that he ought to have
participated in the bid upon being fully satisfied and not having raised any objection at the relevant
time it is he only who is liable to bear the property and other taxes. We are of the view that the
liability on account of property and water taxes claimed by the Nigam, to the extent rejected by the
Official Liquidator is a post-liquidation liability which the Official Liquidator is obliged to discharge
in the absence of a clear provision in the sale notice that the intending purchaser must satisfy
himself as regards the assets of the company in liquidation in all respects including encumbrances.
In the fitness of things, we deem it necessary to direct the Official Liquidator to issue future notices
of sale of assets of companies in liquidation in similar and comprehensive language as the one
quoted supra from the Apex Court decision to avoid complications.”
9. Aggrieved by the common judgment and order dated 05.02.2009 so passed by the Division Bench
of the High Court, the appellant OL has preferred these appeals.
9.1. Learned Counsel for the appellant has submitted that in true operation of the applicable
provisions of law, the appellant cannot be made liable for the post-liquidation claims filed by
respondent No. 1 while disregarding the interest and entitlement of pre-liquidation creditors. It has
been argued that the appellant has admitted the pre-liquidation claims and has rightly rejected the
post-liquidation claims as per Section 530 of the Companies Act, since the workers/employees were
discharged from service. Learned Counsel for the appellant would submit that the assets and
properties of the company in liquidation are deemed to be in the custody of the Court and the
appellant has not carried on any business nor utilised water after liquidation of company for gaining
profit. 9.2. It has been strenuously argued by the learned counsel that the High Court was not
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
9
justified in treating post-liquidation liabilities as a part of the cost of winding up and thereby, giving
such liabilities a priority over all other liabilities of the company in liquidation, which is not
permissible under Sections 529A, 530 and other provisions of the Companies Act. This would also
be prejudicial to pre-liquidation creditors, being the workers, statutory creditors and general body of
creditors.
9.3. It has also been argued that the respondent No. 1 had never taken the necessary legal steps for
realisation of its dues as claimed in its affidavit of proof of debt and the High Court did not even
consider such affidavit before fastening the liability of post-liquidation claim on the appellant. 9.4.
Learned Counsel has also submitted that the benefit given to respondent No. 3 by the High Court
should not have been given in view of the terms and conditions of sale of the assets of the company
in liquidation. Learned Counsel has vehemently submitted that the tenderers/bidders had to satisfy
themselves about all the relevant aspects concerning the assets, when being sold on “as is where is
whatever there is” basis; and therefore, the purchaser would be deemed to have full knowledge of
the defects, encumbrances, and statutory dues before purchasing the assets and properties of the
company in liquidation. Learned counsel would emphasise that when the terms and conditions of
the sale clearly mentioned that sale of assets would be on “as is where is whatever there is" basis,
after having purchased the property on such terms, the purchaser is not entitled to make any claim
as regards diminution in the price on the ground of defect in title or description of the property. It
has further been submitted that the case of OL selling the property of a company in liquidation
under the orders of the Court is altogether different from the case of an individual selling immovable
property belonging to himself. Reliance has been placed on decisions of this Court in United Bank of
India (supra), Haryana Financial Corporation v. Rajesh Gupta: (2010) 1 SCC 655; UT Chandigarh
Administration and Anr. v. Amerjeet Singh and Ors.: (2009) 4 SCC 660; and Punjab Urban
Planning and Development Authority v. Raghu Nath Gupta: (2012) 8 SCC 197.
10. The submissions made on behalf of the appellant have been essentially supported on behalf of
respondent No. 2, Steel Authority of India Limited, one of the creditors of the company in
liquidation, who has lodged the claim alongwith its subsidiary IISCO Ltd. It has been contended on
behalf of respondent No. 2 that the findings of the High Court are not in accord with the law on the
point pertaining to ouster clauses in the sale notice clearly stating that the sale of assets of the
company in liquidation was on “as is where is whatever there is” basis. It has been argued that the
auction purchaser takes the property subject to all defects of title and the doctrine of caveat emptor
directly applies to such purchaser. A decision of this Court in the case of Ahmedabad Municipal
Corporation v. Haji Abdul Gafur Haji Hussenbhai: (1971) 1 SCC 757 has been relied upon.
11. Per Contra, learned counsel for respondent No. 1 has submitted that the appellant OL, as a
custodian of the property, is liable to pay the post-liquidation claim too as raised by Nigam.
11.1. Learned Counsel has submitted that the claims raised by respondent No.1 constitute
“liquidation expenses”, being the expenses that had to be paid by the appellant OL to maintain the
property while being in his custody; and, therefore, the obligation is to be met out of the value
realised from the sale of assets of the company. In this regard, learned counsel for the respondent
No. 1 has submitted that in terms of Rule 338 of the Rules of 1959, the expenses incurred by the OL
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
10
for “preserving, realising or getting in” the assets of the company are required to be paid in priority
and the said Rule provides for the order of preference thereafter in relation to other costs and
expenses payable out of the assets of the company.
11.2. Learned Counsel has also submitted that preferential payments prescribed in Section 530 of
the Companies Act are for payment of specified claims thereunder and that too after payment of
costs and expenses of winding up that are properly incurred by the appellant and which are paid in
priority. Moreover, the said Section 530 relates to claims for pre-liquidation period for which, there
is a need for prescribing priority but, the said provision has no application for the expenses incurred
by OL during post-liquidation period, which are required to be paid in priority. In regard to the
liability and priority concerning post-liquidation expenses, reliance has been placed on a few
English decisions, including that In re Toshoku Finance UK plc: [2002] 1 WLR 671.
11.3. Learned Counsel for respondent No. 1 has placed strong reliance on Section 185 of the M.P. Act
of 1956 to submit that the provision creates an obligation to pay municipal taxes as a first charge on
the land and building as also the movable properties and the proviso expressly provides that arrears
of tax are not recoverable from any occupier who is not the owner, if the arrears are of the period
when such occupier was not in occupation. Therefore, in view of the proviso, arrears of tax for the
period prior to confirmation of auction sale, cannot be recovered from the auction purchaser and
have to be paid by the OL.
11.4. It has also been submitted that in terms of Section 520 of the Companies Act, the municipal
taxes as sought to be claimed by respondent No.1 would be costs of winding up; and the appellant
being in possession of the assets, is obliged to pay the municipal taxes, which ought to have been
paid to protect and preserve the property.
12. Learned counsel for respondent No. 3 – the auction purchaser - has duly supported the orders
impugned with the submissions that the tax dues in the present case were “post-liquidation dues”
amounting to “costs of liquidation” and were to be borne by the OL alone; and could not have been
foisted on the auction purchaser.
12.1. It has been submitted on behalf of respondent No. 3 that auction purchaser is liable towards
property tax and water tax with effect from the date of confirmation of sale in his favour i.e., from
04.07.2003 and he has discharged all such claims but then, there is no liability on him towards taxes
prior to the date of confirmation of sale when property of the company was custodia legis and was in
the hands of OL.
12.2. Furthermore, learned counsel has submitted that the Companies Act and the Rules of 1959 do
not impose any obligation on purchaser to pay dues that relate to period between the date of order
of winding up and date of sale confirmation. The claims in the present case are post- liquidation
charges or costs and are, therefore, expenses of winding up, liable to be borne out of proceeds of
liquidation, if any; and to the extent that they remain unpaid after exhausting the proceeds of
liquidation, are to abate. In this regard, reliance has been placed on the said decision, In re Toshoku
Finance UK plc.
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
11
12.3. Learned Counsel has referred to Section 100 of Transfer of Property Act, 18829 as also to the
decisions of this Court in Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (supra) and AI Champdany Ltd. v.
Official Liquidator and Anr.: (2009) 4 SCC 486 to submit that auction purchaser without notice and
in absence of any provision in terms of sale or any statutory provision could not be made liable for
such arrears of tax; and that no charge could be enforced against any property in hands of transferee
for consideration and without notice of the charge; and that for its enforceability, a provision of law
must expressly provide for enforcement of a charge against the property in the hands of the
transferee for value without notice to the charge and not merely create a charge. Learned counsel
would submit that the dues in relation to municipal taxes in terms of the said M.P. Act of 1956 do
not create any encumbrance or charge on the property such as to run with property for all times and
under all 9 Hereinafter also referred to as ‘the Act of 1882’.
circumstances as held in AI Champdany Ltd. (supra). Moreover, it cannot be said to constitute any
encumbrance which diminishes the value of the property.
12.4. It has been submitted that there is no obligation that has been created or could be assumed on
account of the terms and conditions of the sale carried out by the appellant, particularly when there
was no express provision in the sale notice that the liability of charges on account of property tax
and water tax were to be borne by the purchaser. In regard to the submissions of the appellant that
the auction purchaser had purchased the property with “as is where is and whatever there is”
stipulation, learned counsel has strenuously argued that such a stipulation pertains to the physical
properties of an asset and could not be construed as indicative of constructive notice of charge or
encumbrance. Reliance is placed on Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (supra), which has, in turn,
approved the reasoning of the Full Bench of High Court of Allahabad in the case of Municipal Board,
Cawnpore v. Roop Chand Jain and Anr.: AIR 1940 All 456.
12.5. It has been contented that by virtue of Section 185 of the M.P. Act of 1956, arrears could only
be claimed from a person who was an occupier at relevant time and from no one else and, therefore,
the question of auction purchaser making any inquiries or foisting upon him any constructive
knowledge does not arise; rather, proviso to Section 185 frees an auction purchaser from even
making inquiries about such tax arrears. In this regard, further reliance has been placed on the
decision in Delhi Development Authority v. Kenneth Builders and Developers Pvt. Ltd. and Ors.:
(2016) 13 SCC 561.
12.6. Lastly, learned counsel has placed reliance on correspondence between respondent No. 3 and
the appellant to suggest the sufficiency of funds available with the appellant to discharge the claims
of respondent No.1 before disbursing any left-over amount to the shareholders.
13. We have heard learned counsel for the parties at length and have perused the material placed on
record.
14. For what has been noticed hereinabove, the dispute between appellant OL and respondent No. 1
Nigam, put in a nutshell, is with regard to the rates and taxes for the period between 10.07.1997
(being the date on which the company was ordered to be wound up) and 04.07.2003 (being the date
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
12
on which the sale in favour of the purchaser was confirmed). As noticed, part rejection of the claim
of respondent No. 1 Nigam by the appellant OL, in relation to the period aforesaid between
10.07.1997 to 04.07.2003 was not approved by the Company Court while observing that
post-liquidation liabilities were to be treated as part of the costs of winding up of the company in
liquidation and such liability would get priority over all other liabilities of the company. The
Company Court observed and reiterated that the principle of priority of certain creditors would be
applicable to the liability of the company at the time of passing of the order of winding up but, costs
and expenses incurred on behalf of the company in winding up were to be paid in full; and the
liability of the company to pay rates and taxes would not automatically come to an end with the
order of winding up. The Company Court yet left it open for the appellant OL to file an appeal under
the provisions of the M.P. Act of 1956 while observing that unless such appeal was filed and demand
was reduced, the appellant OL was bound to discharge the tax liability as per the claim of the Nigam
even for the post-liquidation period. The contention of appellant before the Division Bench in
challenge to the order so passed by the Company Court had essentially been with reference to the
terms and conditions of sale and reliance upon the decision in United Bank of India (supra). The
Division Bench compared the terms and conditions of sale in the cited decision and the terms and
conditions of sale in the present case and observed that the sale notice in the present case was not
couched in similar and comprehensive language so as to oblige the respondent No. 3 to make
himself aware about encumbrances, if any, in respect of the assets of the company in liquidation.
The Division Bench further observed that Section 530 of the Companies Act had no application in
relation to the taxes which might have mounted between the date of the order of winding up and the
date of sale of assets. Similarly, the Division Bench indicated inapplicability of Rule 154 of the Rules
of 1959, providing for the manner of estimation of claims on the date of the order of winding up. The
Division Bench summarised its conclusion that the claim in question was that of a post- liquidation
liability which the OL was obliged to discharge in absence of a clear provision in the sale notice
obliging the intended purchaser to satisfy himself as regards the assets of the company in
liquidation in all respects, including encumbrances. More or less the same submissions have been
made by the respective parties in this appeal but, with a little elaboration on their respective stands.
While leaving the irrelevant aspects aside, the neat question is as to whether the claims so made by
the respondent No. 1 Nigam towards property tax and water tax pertaining to the post- liquidation
period, from the date of order of winding up and until the date of confirmation of sale of assets to
the auction purchaser, are admissible against the appellant OL.
15. For dealing with the question at hand, we may usefully take note of the statutory provisions
relevant to the present case. 15.1. Section 529A and the relevant parts of Section 530 of the
Companies Act, 1956 read as under: -
"529A. Overriding preferential payment. - Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being in force, in the
winding up of a company-
(a) workmen's dues; and
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
13
(b) debts due to secured creditors to the extent such debts rank under clause (c) of
the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 529 pari passu with such dues, shall be paid
in priority to all other debts.
(2) The debts payable under clause (a) and clause (b) of sub- section (1) shall be paid
in full, unless the assets are insufficient to meet them, in which case they shall abate
in equal proportions.
530. Preferential payments. - (1) In a winding up subject to the provisions of section
529A, there shall be paid in priority to all other debts-
(a) all revenues taxes, cesses and rates due from the company to the Central or a State
Government or to a local authority at the relevant date as defined in clause (c) of sub-
section (8), and having become due and payable within the twelve months next
before that date;
               ***                            ***                    ***
        (8) For the purpose of this section -
             (a) .....
             (b) ....
             (bb) ....
             (c) the expression "the relevant date" means-
�                (i) in the case of a company ordered to be wound up
compulsorily, the date of the appointment (or first appointment) of a provisional
liquidator, or if no such appointment was made, the date of the winding up order,
unless in either case the company had commenced to be wound up voluntarily before
that date; and
(ii) in any case where sub-clause (i) does not apply, the date of the passing of the
resolution for the voluntary winding up of the company.
*** *** *** "
15.2. Rules 154,163 and 338 of the Companies (Court) Rules, 1959 are as under: -
"R.154. Value of debts - The value of all debts and claims against the company shall,
as far as is possible, be estimated according to the value thereof at the date of the
order of the winding-up of the company or where before the presentation of the
petition for winding up, a resolution has been passed by the company for voluntary
winding-up, at the date of the passing of such resolution.
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
14
*** *** *** R.163. Acceptance or rejection of proof to be communicated – After such
investigation as he may think necessary, the liquidator shall in writing admit or reject
the proof in whole or in part. Every decision of the Liquidator accepting or rejecting a
proof, either wholly or in part, shall be communicated to the creditor concerned by
post under certificate of posting where the proof is admitted and by registered post
for acknowledgement where the proof is rejected wholly or in part, provided that it
shall not be necessary to give notice of the admission of a claim to a creditor who has
appeared before the Liquidator and the acceptance of whose claim had been
communicated to him or his agent in writing at the time of acceptance. Where the
Liquidator rejects a proof, wholly or in part, he shall state the grounds of the rejection
to the creditor in Form No.69, Notice of admission of proof shall be in Form No.70.
*** *** *** R.338. Cost and expenses payable out of the assets in a winding-up by the
Court.-
(1) The assets of a company in a winding-up by the Court remaining after payment of
the fees and expenses properly incurred in preserving, realising or getting in the
assets including, where the company has previously commenced to be wound-up
voluntarily, such remuneration, cost and expenses as the Court may allow to the
liquidator in such voluntary winding-up, shall, subject to any order of the Court and
to the rights of secured creditors if any, be liable to the following payments which
shall be made in the following order of priority, namely :-
First.-the taxed costs of the petition including the taxed costs of any person appearing
on the petition, whose costs are allowed by the Court.
Next.-the costs and expenses of any person who makes, or concurs in making, the
Company's statement of affairs ; Next.-the necessary disbursements of the Official
Liquidator other than expenses properly incurred in preserving, realising or getting
in the properties of the company ;
Next.-the cost of any person properly employed by the Official Liquidators ;
Next.-the fees to be credited to Government under section 451 (2) ;
Next.-the actual out of pocket expenses necessarily incurred by the members of the
Committee of Inspection, and sanctioned by the Court.
(2) Save as otherwise ordered by the Court no payments in respect of bills of
advocates, shall be allowed out of the assets of the company without proof that the
same have been considered and allowed by the taxing officer of the Court. The taxing
officer shall before passing the Bills or charges of an advocate, satisfy himself that the
appointment of an advocate to assist the liquidator in the performance of his duties
has been duly sanctioned. (3) Nothing contained in this Rule shall apply to or affect
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
15
costs which, in the course of legal proceedings by or against the company which is
being wound-up by the Court, are ordered by the Court in which such proceedings
are pending, to be paid by the company or the liquidator, or the rights of the person
to whom such costs are payable."
15.3. Section 185 of the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1956, which is relied upon by
the contesting respondents, reads as under: -
"185. Liability of buildings, lands, etc., for taxes. - All sums due from any person in
respect of taxes on any land or building shall, subject to prior payment of any land
revenue in respect of it due to the government, be a first charge upon the said land or
building and upon any movable property found within or upon such land or building
and belonging to the said person. Provided that no arrears of any such tax shall be
recoverable from any occupier who is not the owner, if such arrears are for a period
during which the occupier was not in occupation."
16. One of the principal points arising for determination in this matter is the impact and effect of
sale of assets of the company in liquidation to the respondent No. 3, particularly when the property
was sold on “as is where is whatever there is” basis. Learned counsel for the appellant has referred to
and relied upon a few decisions of this Court in support of his contention that looking to the terms
and conditions of sale, the purchaser would be deemed to have full knowledge of defects,
encumbrances and statutory dues and would remain liable towards such dues, particularly when the
sale in the present case had been by the appellant OL under the orders of the Court. Per contra,
learned counsel for the contesting respondents have referred to a couple of decisions to assert that
no charge would be enforceable against the property at the hands of transferee for consideration
without notice of charges and, for the municipal taxes not creating an encumbrance or charge as
such on the property in question. We may closely examine the cited decisions to take note of the
ratio decidendi and principles available therein.
17. The sheet anchor of the submissions on behalf of the appellant OL is the decision of this Court in
the case of United Bank of India (supra) that has been cited for the proposition that in the sale of
property and assets of company in liquidation, the Official Liquidator does not hold any guarantee
or warranty in respect thereof; and the intending purchaser has to satisfy himself in all respects,
particularly as regards encumbrances. Therein this Court, inter alia, observed as under: -
“14. When the Official Liquidator sells the property and assets of a company in liquidation under the
orders of the Court he cannot and does not hold out any guarantee or warranty in respect thereof.
This is because he must proceed upon the basis of what the records of the company in liquidation
show. It is for the intending purchaser to satisfy himself in all respects as to the title, encumbrances
and so forth of the immovable property that he proposes to purchase. He cannot after having
purchased the property on such terms then claim diminution in the price on the ground of defect in
title or description of the property. The case of the Official Liquidator selling the property of a
company in liquidation under the orders of the Court is altogether different from the case of an
individual selling immovable property belonging to himself. There is, therefore, no merit in the
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
16
application made on behalf of Triputi that there should be a diminution in price or that it should not
be made liable to pay interest on the sum of Rs 1 crore 98 lakhs.” 17.1. At the first blush, the said
decision might appear to be standing somewhere near to the facts of the present case, for that had
also been a case of sale of the assets by an OL with a somewhat similar stipulation that the sale was
on “as is where is” basis. However, as rightly pointed out by the Division Bench of the High Court,
there had been a marked difference in the terms and conditions of sale in the case of United Bank of
India (supra) and those of the present case.
17.2. As noticed and extracted in the impugned judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court, in
the case of United Bank of India (supra), the sale notice, inter alia, carried a significant stipulation
whereby the purchaser was put to notice to satisfy himself “in all respects as regards movable and
immovable assets as to their title, encumbrances, area, boundary, description, quality, quantity, and
volume etc.” Therein, it was also stated that “the purchaser shall not be entitled to any
compensation or deduction in price on any account whatsoever and shall be deemed to have
purchased property subject to all encumbrances, liens and claims including those under the existing
legislation affecting labour, staff etc.” Such stipulations left nothing to chance and nothing of any
ambiguity where the purchaser was required to satisfy himself not only about the physical attributes
of the assets but also about all encumbrances, liens and claims. Unfortunately, the terms and
conditions of the sale in the present case fell too short of such material stipulations.
17.3. We have reproduced hereinbefore the contents of the sale notice dated 09.05.2003 in the
present case and the relevant terms and conditions of sale of the assets of the company in
liquidation. It is evident that expansive technical expressions were used in the present case by the
appellant OL in the terms and conditions of the sale that the same would be on “as is where is
whatever there is” basis and then, further disclaimer was stated that the appellant OL was not
providing any guarantee as to the quality, quantity or specification of the assets sold. Such
stipulations and disclaimers were definitely putting the purchasers to notice to get themselves
acquainted with what the property is (the nature and extent); where the property is (the locational
attributes); and whatever there is (quantity and condition of the property). The bidders/purchasers
were further warned to satisfy themselves in regard to the aspects of nature, extent, location,
quantity, and quality after physical inspection of the assets and were also informed that they would
be deemed to offer with full knowledge as to defects, if any, in the description, quality or quantity of
the assets sold. All such stipulations were essentially pertaining to the physical properties/attributes
of the assets in question but, the significant omission in those terms and conditions had been to
make it obligatory on the bidder/purchaser to make himself aware about encumbrances, liens and
claims attached to the assets in question. This omission strikes at the very root of the case of the
appellant.
17.4. The Division Bench of the High Court has rightly said that if the intending purchaser was
required to satisfy himself in all respects including encumbrances, he might not be heard in any
objection about want of knowledge of encumbrances but, if he was not so warned, such an obligation
on him to make himself aware about encumbrances cannot be foisted by any deeming fiction.
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
17
18. The decision of this Court in Haryana Financial Corporation (supra) has also been cited to
submit that OL does not hold any guarantee or warranty in respect of property sold. In the said case,
the appellant Financial Corporation had issued an advertisement for sale of various units and the
respondent had been one of the bidders who offered a sum of Rs. 50 lakh, and deposited Rs. 2.5 lakh
by way of earnest money. There was some dispute related to presence of rasta at the land. Not being
satisfied with response of appellant, respondent did not submit further money. Appellant invited
fresh tenders and forfeited the money deposited by respondent. In the writ petition preferred by
respondent, the Division Bench of High Court quashed forfeiture and ordered for refund along with
12% interest and Rs. 5,000 costs. In appeal before this Court, one of the submissions on behalf of
the appellant Financial Corporation had been with reference to the aforesaid decision in United
Bank of India (supra). While distinguishing the said decision, this Court observed that Official
Liquidator would proceed on the basis of the records of the company in liquidation and, therefore, it
was for the intending purchaser to satisfy himself in all respects as to the title, encumbrances etc. of
the immovable property that he intended to purchase; and that purchaser cannot after having
purchased the property on such terms, claim diminution in the price on the ground of defect in the
title or description of the property. The Court further observed that the appellant Financial
Corporation was exercising the rights of an owner in selling the property and was not selling the
property as an Official Liquidator; and the principles applicable to an Official Liquidator selling
property under the orders of Court would not be applicable to an individual selling immovable
property belonging to himself. Moreover, the Court observed that respondent therein made all
necessary inquiries and it was the Corporation who failed to give fair description of property offered
for sale. The Court, inter alia, observed as under: -
“23. In our opinion, the appellants cannot be given the benefit of Clause 5 of the
advertisement. The appellant Corporation cannot be permitted to take advantage of
its own wrong. Clause 5 undoubtedly permits the forfeiture of the earnest money
deposited.
But this can only be if the auction-purchaser fails to comply with the conditions of sale. In our
opinion, the respondent has not failed to comply with the conditions of sale. Rather, it is the
appellant Corporation which has acted unfairly, and is trying to take advantage of its own wrong.”
“24. In view of the aforesaid, we are of the considered opinion that the appellant Corporation cannot
be permitted to rely upon Section 55 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882. The appellant
Corporation failed to disclose to the respondent the material defect about the non-existence of the
independent 3 “karams” passage to the property. Therefore, the appellant Corporation clearly acted
in breach of Sections 55(1)(a) and (b) of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882.
*** *** *** “27. We are also of the considered opinion that the reliance placed on the judgment of
this Court by the counsel for the appellants in United Bank of India v. Official Liquidator [(1994) 1
SCC 575] is wholly misconceived. The aforesaid judgment relates to sale of the property and assets
of a company in liquidation by the Official Liquidator under the orders of the court. Therefore it is
observed that the Official Liquidator cannot and does not hold any guarantee or warranty in respect
of the property sold. That is because the Official Liquidator proceeds on the basis of what the
records of the company in liquidation show. Therefore it is for the intending purchaser to satisfy
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
18
himself in all respects as to the title and encumbrances and so forth of the immovable property that
he proposes to purchase. In those circumstances it is held that the purchaser cannot after having
purchased the property on such terms then claim diminution in the price on the ground of defect in
the title or description of the property.
28. The judgment clearly goes on to further hold as follows: (Official Liquidator case [(1994) 1 SCC
575] , SCC p. 584, para 14) “14. … The case of the Official Liquidator selling the property of a
company in liquidation under the orders of the court is altogether different from the case of an
individual selling immovable property belonging to himself.” The aforesaid observation would be
clearly applicable to the Corporation as it is exercising the rights of an owner in selling the property.
The appellant Corporation is not selling the property as an Official Liquidator.” 18.1. Evidently,
Haryana Financial Corporation (supra) had been a case of sale by the Corporation, which was
distinguished from sale by an OL. Therein, while pointing out inapplicability of the decision in
United Bank of India (supra), this Court observed that OL would not be holding out any guarantee
or warranty in respect of the property sold because he would be proceeding on the basis of records
of the company in liquidation and, therefore, it was for the intending purchaser to satisfy himself in
all respects as to the title, encumbrances etc. of the immovable property sought to be purchased; and
such a purchaser could not, after having purchased the property on such terms, claim diminution in
the price on the ground of defect in the title or description of the property. The said decision cannot
be read as an authority for any generalised proposition as if the Official Liquidator, while conducting
sale of the assets of the company in liquidation, is absolved of the duty to state basic stipulations in
the sale notice.
19. In UT Chandigarh Administration (supra), this Court dealt with the consumer complaints of
respondents filed to contend that the appellant was not legally entitled to claim balance of premium
or annual rent, for having failed to provide basic amenities at the residential and commercial sites
auctioned by way of advertisement. This Court allowed the appeals as the purchaser was not a
consumer with reference to public auction of existing sites. Notwithstanding this, it was observed, in
regard to auction as per “as is where is basis” thus: -
“19….. In a public auction of sites, the position is completely different. A person
interested can inspect the sites offered and choose the site which he wants to acquire
and participate in the auction only in regard to such site. Before bidding in the
auction, he knows or is in a position to ascertain, the condition and situation of the
site. He knows about the existence or lack of amenities. The auction is on
“as-is-where-is basis”. With such knowledge, he participates in the auction and offers
a particular bid. There is no compulsion that he should offer a particular price. When
the sites auctioned are existing sites, without any assurance/representation relating
to amenities, there is no question of deficiency of service or denial of service. Where
the bidder has a choice and option in regard to the site and price and when there is
no assurance of any facility or amenity, the question of the owner of the site
becoming a service provider, does not arise even by applying the tests laid down in
LDA [(1994) 1 SCC 243] or Balbir Singh [(2004) 5 SCC 65].
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
19
20. Where there is a public auction without assuring any specific or particular amenities, and the
prospective purchaser/lessee participates in the auction after having an opportunity of examining
the site, the bid in the auction is made keeping in view the existing situation, position and condition
of the site. If all amenities are available, he would offer a higher amount. If there are no amenities,
or if the site suffers from any disadvantages, he would offer a lesser amount, or may not participate
in the auction. Once with open eyes, a person participates in an auction, he cannot thereafter be
heard to say that he would not pay the balance of the price/premium or the stipulated interest on
the delayed payment, or the ground rent, on the ground that the site suffers from certain
disadvantages or on the ground that amenities are not provided.” 19.1. The aforesaid case of UT
Chandigarh Administration, relating to the complaints of want of basic amenities in the property
sold in auction on “as is where is” basis has no relevance whatsoever to the facts of the present case.
20. In the case of Punjab Urban Planning and Development Authority (supra), the bone of
contention was the levy of interest, penal interest, and penalty on account of delayed payment of
instalments after accepting allotment of commercial plots by way of auction. The Court held that
purchasers would be liable to pay such interest having accepted the commercial plots subject to the
conditions of the auction notice and allotment letter while observing, inter alia, as under: -
“17…..We may reiterate that after having accepted the offer of the commercial plots in
a public auction with a superimposed condition i.e. on “as-is-where-is” basis and
after having accepted the terms and conditions of the allotment letter, including
instalment facility for payment, the respondents cannot say that they are not bound
by the terms and conditions of the auction notice, as well as that of the allotment
letter. On facts also, we have found that there was no inordinate delay on the part of
PUDA in providing those facilities.” 20.1. Again, the aforesaid case of Punjab Urban
Planning and Development Authority wherein, the bone of contention was levy of
penal interest and penalty on account of delayed payment of instalments, has no
relevance whatsoever to the facts of the present case.
21. The decision of this Court in Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (supra) has been relied upon by
the contesting respondents as also by the supporting respondent. Therein, after insolvency
proceedings commenced in 1949, the property in question was auctioned and purchased by the
respondent-purchaser in 1954. It was attached by the Municipal Corporation owing to the fact that
the municipal taxes in arrear for 1949-50 to 1953-1955 had not been paid, leading the
respondent-purchaser to file a suit for declaration. The Division Bench of Gujarat High Court held
that the respondent was the owner of the property and that the charge for arrears was not
enforceable, which was challenged by the Corporation before this Court. With reference to Section
100 of the Act of 1882, it was held that no charge would be enforceable against any property in the
hands of transferee for consideration without notice of charge, apart from where otherwise provided
for by law. The Court, inter alia, made the following observations: -
“4. This section in unambiguous language lays down that no charge is enforceable
against any property in the hands of a transferee for consideration without notice of
the charge except where it is otherwise expressly provided by any law for the time
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
20
being in force. The saving provision of law must expressly provide for enforcement of
a charge against the property in the hands of a transferee for value without notice of
the charge and not merely create a charge. …..
*** *** ***
11. Now the circumstances which by a deeming fiction impute notice to a party are
based, on his wilful abstention to enquire or search which a person ought to make or,
on his gross negligence.
This presumption of notice is commonly known as constructive notice. Though originating in equity
this presumption of notice is now a part of our statute and we have to interpret it as such. Wilful
abstention suggests conscious or deliberate abstention and gross negligence is indicative of a higher
degree of neglect. Negligence is ordinarily understood as an omission to take such reasonable care
as under the circumstances is the duty of a person of ordinary prudence to take. In other words it is
an omission to do something which a reasonable man guided by considerations which normally
regulate the conduct of human affairs would do or doing something which normally a prudent and
reasonable man would not do. The question of wilful abstention or gross negligence and, therefore,
of constructive notice considered from this point of view is generally a question of fact or at best
mixed question of fact and law depending primarily on the facts and circumstances of each case and
except for cases directly falling within the three explanations, no inflexible rule can be laid down to
serve as a straight-jacket covering all possible contingencies. The question one has to answer in
circumstances like the present is not whether the purchaser had the means of obtaining and might
with prudent caution have obtained knowledge of the charge but whether in not doing so he acted
with wilful abstention or gross negligence. Being a question depending on the behaviour of a
reasonably prudent man, the Courts have to consider it in the background of Indian conditions.
Courts in India should, therefore, be careful and cautious in seeking assistance from English
precedents which should not be blindly or too readily followed.” 21.1. In the aforesaid case of
Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation, while commencing the discussion, this Court also observed, as
underscored on behalf of respondent No. 2, that ‘the purchaser at auction sale takes the property
subject to all the defects of title and the doctrine of caveat emptor (let the purchaser be aware)
applies to such purchaser’ but thereafter, the Court observed that the case of the judgment-debtor
having no saleable interest at all in the property sold such as contemplated by the Order XXI Rule 91
of the Code of Civil Procedure was, however, different and not covered by this doctrine. Such
observations do not lend support to the case of the appellant so as to shift the entire burden on the
auction purchaser despite significant omission in the terms and conditions of sale.
22. In AI Champdany Ltd. (supra), the appellant had purchased the assets of the company under
liquidation and was subsequently served with notice by municipality for payment of arrears of
property tax. Upon taking out a chamber summons with the prayer that appellant would only be
liable for property tax after date of confirmation of sale, the application was dismissed on the
ground that it was incumbent on the purchaser to make enquiries regarding the liabilities attached
to the assets before making an offer. The intra-court appeal was dismissed by the Division Bench. In
the appeal before this Court, it was held that dues in relation to municipal tax in terms of the
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
21
relevant provisions of the Companies Act did not create an encumbrance or charge on the property
and was considered to be a personal liability. This Court, inter alia, observed and held as under: -
“10. Dues in relation to the municipal tax in terms of the provisions of the said Act do
not create any encumbrance on the property. It does not create any charge. It is
considered to be a personal liability. On the aforementioned premise, we have to
construe the terms and conditions of the sale… *** *** ***
12. The terms and conditions of the sale must be read as a whole. It must be given a
purposive meaning. The word “encumbrance” in relation to the word “immovable
property” carries a distinct meaning. It ordinarily cannot be assigned a general
and/or dictionary meaning.
*** *** ***
15. The respondent municipality was an unsecured creditor. In that capacity it cannot
stand on a higher footing than an ordinary unsecured creditor who is required to
stand in queue with all others similarly situated for the purpose of realisation of their
dues from the sale proceeds.
16. The Companies Act or any other law does not impose any additional obligation
upon the purchaser to make an enquiry with regard to the liabilities of the companies
other than those which would impede their value.
*** *** ***
18. We may notice that Section 141 of the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations
Act provides the property taxes to be a first charge on the premise for which they are
assessed. It is in that view of the matter, Section 100 of the Transfer of Property Act
was found to be capable of being invoked therein, which reads as under:
“100. Charges.—Where immovable property of one person is by act of parties or
operation of law made security for the payment of money to another, and the
transaction does not amount to a mortgage, the latter person is said to have a charge
on the property, and all the provisions hereinbefore contained which apply to a
simple mortgage shall, so far as may be, apply to such charge. Nothing in this section
applies to the charge of a trustee on the trust property for expenses properly incurred
in the execution of his trust, and, save as otherwise expressly provided by any law for
the time being in force, no charge shall be enforced against any property in the hands
of a person to whom such property has been transferred for consideration and
without notice of the charge.” There cannot, thus, be any doubt or dispute that a
provision of law must expressly provide for an enforcement of a charge against the
property in the hands of the transferee for value without notice to the charge and not
merely create a charge.”
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
22
23. The aforesaid decisions in the cases of Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation and AI Champdany
Ltd. had been concerning the issue relating to liability of auction purchaser of property in Court sale
towards arrears of municipal taxes due on the date of sale, which are of statutory charge on the
property sold and of which, the purchaser had no notice. On interpretation and application of
second part of Section 100 of the Act of 1882, this Court held that the auction purchaser without
notice, in the absence of stipulation in the terms of sale or any statutory provision, could not be
made liable for such dues. In the fact situation of the present case, the principles aforesaid operate
heavily against the case of the appellant.
24. It has rightly been argued on behalf of the contesting respondents, with reference to Section 100
of the Act of 1882 and the decision of this Court in AI Champdany Ltd. (supra), that in absence of
any statutory provision, the auction purchaser without notice of any charge could not be made liable
for the arrears of tax in question during the post-liquidation period. The provisions of the M.P. Act
of 1956 were not creating any such encumbrance or charge on the property which would attach to
the property for all times and under all circumstances nor they could be said to constitute any
encumbrances which diminish the value of the property. In contrast, they would only qualify as
expenses for “preserving, realising or getting in” the assets of the company and thus, shall have to be
paid in priority and before any other payment in the course of distribution of the assets of the
company or value thereof.
25. There remains another significant factor in the present case that the property in question was
indisputably governed by Section 185 of the M.P. Act of 1956, which clearly provides that all sums
due from any person in respect of taxes on any land or building shall be of first charge upon the said
land or building and upon any movable property found within or upon such land or building. The
proviso thereto further makes it clear that no arrears of any such tax would be recoverable from any
occupier who is not the owner, if such arrears were for a period during which the occupier was not in
occupation. In the face of undeniable operation of the said Section 185 of the M.P. Act of 1956 over
the property in question, we are clearly of the view that the bidder/purchaser was entitled to
proceed on the assumption that even if there were any arrears of such taxes under the M.P. Act of
1956, the same would not be recoverable from him. Though, as aforesaid, the cryptic terms and
conditions of sale in the present case, wanting in material stipulations, never obliged a purchaser to
carry out a search as regards encumbrances but, even if such a requirement is taken into
consideration on general principles of caveat emptor, the other assumptions available with reference
to the said Section 185 of the M.P. Act of 1956 cannot be ignored.
26. The submissions made on behalf of the appellant about the likely prejudice to the other
pre-liquidation creditors if such post-liquidation liabilities are given preference over other liabilities;
and reference to Section 529A and 530 of the Companies Act do not carry any relevance and do not
make out any case for interference. The provisions contained in Sections 529A and 530 essentially
relate to overriding preferential payments as also preferential payments in relation to the classes of
dues/debts specified therein. However, the question of payment of the same would arise after
payment of costs and expenses of winding up that are properly incurred by the appellant OL and are
to be paid in priority. As aforesaid, the taxes payable to the respondent No. 1 Nigam during the
period in question would directly amount to the costs and expenses of liquidation.
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
23
27. This being the position, in our view, the Company Court and then the Division Bench of the High
Court have rightly underscored the faults on the part of the appellant OL and have rightly held that
the liability on account of the property tax and water tax claimed by the respondent No. 1 to the
extent rejected by the appellant OL has been a post-liquidation liability, which the OL was obliged to
discharge, in view of omission in the sale notice and then, in view of the operation of Rule 338 of the
Rules of 1959.
28. Put in different words, as regards the operation of the said Rule 338 of the Rules of 1959, we are
inclined to accept the reasoning of the High Court that on the facts and in the circumstances of the
present case, arrears of property tax and water tax until the date of confirmation of sale, i.e.,
04.07.2003, would qualify as the expenses for “preserving, realising or getting in” the assets of the
company and thus, shall have to be paid in priority by the appellant OL.
29. For what has been discussed hereinabove, we do not find it necessary to dilate upon the other
decisions cited by learned counsel for the parties. As aforesaid, the ambiguity as also omissions in
the terms and conditions of the sale notice in the present case obviously lead to the position that the
view taken by the High Court calls for no interference.
30. Accordingly, and in view of the above, these appeals fail and are, therefore, dismissed. No Costs.
……....……………………. J.
(DINESH MAHESHWARI) ……....……………………. J.
(ANIRUDDHA BOSE) NEW DELHI;
MAY 04, 2023.
Official Liquidator,Calcutta vs Ujjain Nagar Palika Nigam on 4 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187611387/
24
