Supreme Court of India
Rajender Singh vs Govt. Of N.C.T. Of Delhi & Ors on 16 February, 2016
Author: S K Singh
Bench: Shiva Kirti Singh, R.K. Agrawal
                                                                              REPORTABLE
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                        CIVIL APPEAL NO.1427 OF 2016
                 [Arising out of S.L.P.(C)No.15921 of 2013]
Rajender Singh                                           …..Appellant
      Versus
Govt. of N.C.T. of Delhi & Ors.                     …..Respondents
                               J U D G M E N T
SHIVA KIRTI SINGH, J.
Heard the parties at some length. Leave granted.
By the impugned order dated January 15, 2013 the High Court of Delhi has dismissed L.P.A. No.39
of 2013 preferred by the appellant. As a consequence the judgment and order passed by the learned
Single Judge dated 13.12.2012 passed in W.P.(C)No.7124/2009 as well as order passed in review
from that order, dated 18.12.2012 stand affirmed.
The relevant facts leading to the aforesaid orders of the High Court need to be noticed only in brief.
Consolidation proceedings under The East Punjab Holdings (Consolidation and Prevention of
Fragmentation) Act, 1948 [hereinafter referred to as ‘the 1948 Act’] commenced in Village Karala,
Delhi around 1975 and concluded in 1976. After about 23 years of closure of consolidation
proceedings, on 16.4.1999 the contesting respondents no.4 to 7 filed an application under Section
43A of the 1948 Act, seeking allotment of land of Khasra No.168 on the ground that during the
consolidation proceedings their father late Rajender Singh was found to be in possession over the
area of 11 biswas of Scheme Khasra No.168 (old Khasra No.703). Such possession was allegedly
reflected in the Scheme of Consolidation of the village and described as – “Scheme Kabizan”. The
consequent Case No.2/CO/1999 was initially dismissed by the Consolidation Officer by order dated
11.05.1999 on the ground that consolidation proceedings had been completed long back and hence
the Consolidation Officer had become functus officio. That order was however reversed by the
Financial Commissioner before whom the parties agreed that the Consolidation Officer still had
jurisdiction in respect of an application invoking powers under Section 43A of the 1948 Act. After
remand, the Consolidation Officer commenced hearing of the case but it was disrupted on account
of a necessity to implead legal representatives of late Baljit Singh on whom notices were ordered to
Rajender Singh vs Govt. Of N.C.T. Of Delhi & Ors on 16 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75409993/
1
be issued on 04.10.2004. The order passed on 04.10.2004 did not indicate any further date for
hearing. The next order dated 18.10.2004 noted service of notices on the concerned legal
representatives of Baljit Singh. It also recorded presence of the applicant Tej Ram along with his
counsel. Evidently the appellant or his counsel were not present on that date or on the next date
which was fixed as 16.11.2004. On the next further date, i.e., 24.12.2004, the Consolidation Officer
allowed the claim after noticing presence of only Tej Ram. Inspite of the presence of the appellant or
his counsel not mentioned, at one place the order records that the counsel for respondent had
argued the case at length and had pressed for dismissal of the petition because father of the
claimants did not claim during his lifetime and allegedly the claim was inappropriate at such late
stage. The order also records that as per revenue records the aforesaid land had been allotted in the
name of respondents no.3 to 7 as joint holding of the respondents separated during consolidation
proceedings. It was also noticed that the encumbrances on the said land were only against the
appellant Rajender Singh son of Hoshiar Singh. As per order the revenue records were perused
along with the consolidation scheme leading to fresh allotment to Tej Ram and others of new Khasra
No.168 having area of 11 biswas on the basis of “Scheme Kabizan”. In light of such allotment the
Halka Patwari was directed to make corresponding entries in the revenue records. Against the order
of Consolidation Officer allowing the claim of respondents Tej Ram and others the appellant and the
proforma respondents filed a Revision Petition in the court of Financial Commissioner, Delhi
bearing Case No.47/2005-CA. The case of the appellant was that no opportunity of hearing was
given by the Consolidation Officer and the order was passed by manipulating the records when in
fact no notice of hearing was ever issued after the decision to issue notice to legal representatives of
late Baljit Singh. The plea of possession being with the appellant and the proforma respondents as
also of inordinate delay of 23 years was also raised. However, the revision case was dismissed on
03.02.2009 only on the basis of a record showing Scheme Kabiz which was allegedly never
challenged by any body.
That order of the Financial Commissioner was impugned through a writ petition first before the
Single Judge and then also before the Division Bench through L.P.A. as already noticed earlier.
Since the appellant was unsuccessful throughout, he has preferred the present appeal to raise three-
fold grievances. The first grievance is that in fact no opportunity of hearing was afforded by the
Consolidation Officer and as a consequence the appellant could not place his case properly to show
that there was no occasion to know of the entry of “Scheme Kabiz” or to challenge the same when it
was never made known to affected persons by making allotment on its basis. According to appellant
the land remained under their possession which was also reflected in the revised revenue records
prepared pursuant to the finalization of consolidation proceedings. The second grievance is that no
inquiry was made as to what was the nature of possession reflected as Scheme Kabiz. According to
learned counsel for the appellant, if the possession was not through any method of encumbrance
known to law but only that of a rank trespasser, such possession could not have been made the basis
of allotment under Section 43A of the 1948 Act as has been done by the order of the Consolidation
Officer dated 24.12.2004. The last grievance is that the Consolidation Officer as well as other
authorities of the High Court failed to appreciate that claim under Section 43A was made after 23
years and such belated claim should not have been entertained or allowed. In support of the second
and third contentions noted above, learned counsel for the appellant has placed reliance upon
judgment of this Court in the case of Mange Ram v. Financial Commissioner & Ors. (2003) 2 SCC 1.
Rajender Singh vs Govt. Of N.C.T. Of Delhi & Ors on 16 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75409993/
2
Learned counsel for the contesting respondents has on the other hand taken us through the Scheme
of Consolidation as provided in the 1948 Act and has highlighted that the grievance of the applicants
before the Consolidation Officer under Section 43A was within the scope of that Section and no
objection can be raised on account of delay of 23 years because once Scheme Kabiz was recorded in
favour of applicants, Section 26 of the 1948 Act required such encumbrance by way of possession to
be transferred and attached to the holding or tenancy allotted under the scheme to the land owner
or the tenant who had suffered the encumbrance. Learned counsel for the respondents made a
further submission that on account of encumbrance noted in the scheme, the
respondents/applicants had continued in possession and their grievance was only in respect of
mistake or omission in preparation of new record of rights prepared under Section 22 of the 1948
Act and such mistake or omission in the preparation of record of rights cannot have material effect
on the substantive rights of parties which they continued to enjoy and once the mistake was realised
by the authorities, the exercise of power under Section 43A for correction of clerical or arithmetical
mistakes was appropriate and the High Court rightly did not interfere with such correction of
clerical errors. He reiterated that from the wordings appearing in the order of the Consolidation
Officer dated 24.12.2004 it is beyond any doubt that order was passed after hearing learned counsel
for the appellant. In support of his submissions based upon Section 26, learned counsel placed
reliance upon judgment in the case of Amar Singh, Jagram (Dead) by LRs. v. Chandgi (Dead) by LRs
(1989) 1 SCC
308. After hearing the parties and perusal of the relevant orders and material on record, we are
satisfied with the submission that the final order passed by the Consolidation Officer on 24.12.2004
was without opportunity or notice of hearing to the appellant and proforma respondents subsequent
to adjournment of the matter without further dates on 04.10.2004. The order itself mentions only
the presence of Tej Ram and not the appellant or any one from his side. The order does not name
any advocate from either of the sides and the observation that ‘the counsel for the respondent has
argued the case at length’ may be a mistake or a casual observation based upon inconclusive and
ineffective hearing on earlier dates. On this ground alone which has not been properly considered
either by the revisional authority or the High Court, the matter deserves to be remitted back to the
Consolidation Officer for fresh hearing and re-determination in accordance with law.
However, it is deemed proper to clarify some relevant aspects of the case as well as legal issues that
must be kept in mind by the Consolidation Officer for proper adjudication after remand. A perusal
of the order passed by the Financial Commissioner discloses that he was of the view that the
recording of “Scheme Kabiz” had attained finality as it was never challenged. Such conclusion
should not have been drawn without examining whether this entry was duly published inviting any
objections or in the alternative whether such recording in a chart was further acted upon leading to
allocation or allotment of the land with the corresponding encumbrances. So far as the case of Amar
Singh (supra) is concerned, it was not a case of exercise of power under Section 43A and the issue
whether the defendants of that case were tenants in respect of the lands in question was found to be
beyond any cavil and concluded by concurrent finding of facts. In that case, since the power and
jurisdiction of Consolidation Officer under Section 26 was questioned, this Court held that the
officer had jurisdiction to define the portion of the land newly allotted under the scheme and put the
holder of the encumbrance in possession of the corresponding part of the substituted holding
Rajender Singh vs Govt. Of N.C.T. Of Delhi & Ors on 16 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75409993/
3
allotted to the land owner in lieu of his original holding.
In the case of Mange Ram (supra) this Court found that the appellant had advanced claim of
possession over a piece of land measuring 5 biswas on the basis that his predecessor had trespassed
over that land and had carried out cultivation. The appellant had relied on a list of 1982 showing his
possession. The consolidation operation had been concluded and closed in the year 1982 whereas
application for being put in possession was filed by the appellant after 11 years in 1993. In such
circumstances this Court held that a mere trespasser could not be treated as an encumbrancer as
envisaged under the 1948 Act. The Court further held that the appellant must fail on account of long
delay and laches of 11 years in approaching the authorities for relief.
From the materials on record we could not find anything throwing light on the nature of possession
claimed by the contesting respondents which is relevant for one of the propositions emerging from
the judgment in the case of Mange Ram (supra). In several of the pleadings the appellant has
claimed that they continued to enjoy allotment in their favour and possession has remained with
them over the 11 biswas of land in the concerned Khasra. However, during arguments learned
counsel for the contesting respondents has made a counter claim that possession has remained with
the contesting respondents and therefore delay of 23 years cannot be material. We expect the
Consolidation Officer to keep these aspects in mind while deciding the matter afresh. From the
prayer made on behalf of the contesting respondents before the Consolidation Officer it is evident
that they had not prayed for mere correction in the new record of rights prepared at the instance of
the Consolidation Officer under Section 22 of the 1948 Act, rather they had prayed for allotment or
allocation which was the relief granted by the Consolidation Officer who ordered for revising the
record of rights as a sequel to such allotment. However, if even without the allotment or allocation
made by the Consolidation Officer through his order dated 24.12.2004, the applicants/contesting
respondents could continue with possession over the land in question and whether in fact they
continued to enjoy such possession, needs to be enquired into because it will have an important
bearing at least over the effect of delay of 23 years. Lastly, the Consolidation Officer should keep in
mind that although it has jurisdiction to look into the claim under Section 43A of the 1948 Act, such
jurisdiction can be exercised only to correct errors which are clerical or arithmetical in nature. The
mere fact that the appellant conceded to jurisdiction under Section 43A leading to an order of
remand will not have the effect of enlarging such jurisdiction beyond what is prescribed by the law.
The aforesaid clarifications are relevant in the facts of the case to ensure that no further unnecessary
time is wasted in deciding the real controversy. Hence while setting aside the impugned orders of
the High Court and also the orders passed by the Consolidation authorities on or after 24.12.2004,
we remand the matter to the Consolidation Officer for re- hearing the parties and fresh
determination within six months, in accordance with law keeping in mind the legal principles and
other relevant observations recorded earlier in this order as guidelines. It is also made clear that we
have not expressed any opinion on the merits of the case of either parties.
The appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent but without any order as to costs.
…………………………………….J.
Rajender Singh vs Govt. Of N.C.T. Of Delhi & Ors on 16 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75409993/
4
[SHIVA KIRTI SINGH] ……………………………………..J.
[R.K. AGRAWAL] New Delhi.
February 16, 2016.
-----------------------
Rajender Singh vs Govt. Of N.C.T. Of Delhi & Ors on 16 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75409993/
5
