Supreme Court of India
Ravi Mandal vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 18 May, 2023
Author: Hrishikesh Roy
Bench: Hrishikesh Roy, Manoj Misra
                                                                        REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.511 OF 2011
                         RAVI MANDAL                                    … Appellant
                                                               VERSUS
                         STATE OF UTTARAKHAND                           … Respondent
                                                               WITH
                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2345 OF 2011
                         SHABBIR                                        … Appellant
                                                               VERSUS
                         STATE OF UTTARAKHAND                           … Respondent
                                                      JUDGMENT
MANOJ MISRA, J.
1. These two appeals are against the judgment and order of the High Court of Uttarakhand at
Nainital (for short “the High Court”), dated 07.04.2010, Signature Not Verified Digitally signed by
Jayant Kumar Arora dismissing Criminal Appeals Nos.54 and 59 of 2004 Date: 2023.05.18 filed
against the judgment and order of Additional 17:33:31 IST Reason:
Sessions Judge/Fast Track Court Haldwani, Nainital (for short “the Trial Court”) dated 28.01.2004,
and, thereby, affirming the conviction and sentence awarded to the appellants detailed below: (i) life
imprisonment under section 302 read with section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short
“IPC”) along with one year R.I. under section 201 IPC in Sessions Trial (S.T.) No.93/2002 (State vs.
Shabbir Ahmad and Another); (ii) one year R.I. with fine of Rs.500/- under section 25 Arms Act to
appellant Shabbir in S.T. No.104 of 2002 (State vs. Shabbir Ahmed); and (iii) one year R.I. with fine
of Rs.500/- under section 4/25 of Arms Act to appellant Ravi Mandal in connected S.T. No.105 of
2002 (State vs. Ravi Mandal). Introductory Facts:
2. On 01.11.2001, Man Singh (PW-1), father of Chhotu @ Surjeet (the deceased), on finding his son’s
dead body in a forest, 150 meters west of Government Inter College, lodged a first information
Ravi Mandal vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154059911/
1
report (FIR) at P.S. Lalkuan, Haldwani, district Nainital at about 7.30 hrs, alleging therein that, —
on 31.10.2001, at about 2100 Hours, the deceased was with his friends Govind and Ravi Bangali
(later identified as Ravi Mandal); Govind, a criminal, had been influencing his son to choose a
wrong path; therefore, he suspects that these persons have killed his son and concealed his body in
the forest. Thereafter, on 10.11.2001, PW-1 gave a written information to the police stating that it
was not Govind but Shabbir who along with Ravi and one Mazhar Khan were with the deceased on
that fateful night. In this written information, it was alleged that Babloo (PW-7) had misled him to
take the name of Govind.
3. During the course of investigation, the police effected arrest of the two accused, namely, the
appellants herein, and disclosed recovery of a 12 bore country made pistol with one live cartridge
from Shabbir and a knife from Ravi Mandal, giving rise to two separate cases against each of the two
accused under the Arms Act.
4. On completion of investigation three charge sheets were laid giving rise to three sessions trials
which were connected with each other and decided by a common judgment, which has been
affirmed by the High Court.
Prosecution Evidence:
5. To appreciate the arguments advanced in this case, it would be apposite to notice the testimony of
the prosecution witnesses in brief. The prosecution examined 10 witnesses, the gist of their
testimony is as under:
(i) PW-1 – Man Singh - Informant (father of the deceased) He is not an eyewitness of the murder.
He, however, proved lodging of the FIR on 01.11.2001 and stated that, — on 31.10.2001 in the
evening Babloo (PW-7) came to his residence, told him that the deceased, Ravi Bangali and Govind
were asking for food and have sent him to fetch food for them; on that request, PW-1’s wife (Urmila
Devi- PW-3) cooked food, packed it and gave it to Babloo, who left with the food; next day, he came
to know that dead body of his son was lying in the forest; he then visited the place, brought the dead
body to Lalkuan Police Station and lodged the report; later, when he came to know that Govind was
not with his son, rather it was Shabbir along with others who were there, he gave the second report
(Ex. Ka-2) to the police on 10.11.2001.
During cross examination, PW-1 admitted that there were three or four criminal cases against his
son (the deceased) wherein, he was on bail.
With regard to the sequence of events on the date of lodging the FIR, PW-1 stated that,— a constable
with two men came in the morning to inform him that dead body of his son is lying in the forest; on
getting the information he went to that place and brought the body to the police station to lodge the
FIR whereafter, the body was sealed and sent to Haldwani Hospital for autopsy. He also stated that
papers relating to recovery of tiffin box; collection of blood-stained earth etc. were prepared at the
police station and he signed those papers at the police station itself. PW-1 also clarified that the
second report (i.e. Ex. Ka-2) was dictated by the Sub-Inspector at the police station and he wrote
Ravi Mandal vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154059911/
2
whatever was told to him.
At the fag end of his cross-examination, PW-1 stated that he had informed the Sub-Inspector
regarding financial transactions with Govind and also about Govind not refunding the money, which
gave rise to enmity.
(ii) PW-2 - Chandan Singh He deposed that, — (a) he knew Shabbir Ahmad and Ravi Mandal; (b)
they had come to his shop with the deceased at about 1900 Hours on 31.10.2001 and from there they
proceeded towards the cinema hall; (c) later, in the night of 31.10.2001/ 01.11.2001, at about 0030
Hours, he saw the accused-appellants emerging from the forest and walking fast; (d) at that time,
hands of Shabbir were blood-stained and Ravi’s clothes were also having blood stains, (e) seeing
PW-2, they got nervous, Shabbir threatened PW-2 by saying that if PW-2 discloses what he has seen
to any one, he would meet the same fate as Chhotu (the deceased); (f) next day morning, PW-2
learnt that dead body of Chhotu has been found in that forest.
To show the reason for his presence there, at that odd hour of the night, PW-2 stated that,— his
parents have a separate house at Khatta, where he goes at least once a week; that night, after having
dinner, while returning from his parents’ house and proceeding towards his own house/shop, at
about 0030 Hours, he witnessed the incident.
During cross examination, PW-2 stated that, — his shop is run from a room in his house; it remains
open from 0500 Hours till 2300 Hours; his house comprises of 3 rooms where he resides with his
wife and five sons; the usual time of his dinner is 2100 Hours.
A suggestion was put to PW-2 that mother of Ravi (one of the appellants) is PW-2’s neighbour on
whose land PW-2 had constructed his shop. This suggestion was denied by PW-2.
With regard to the delay in giving information to the police, PW-2 stated that he was petrified by the
incident and when the accused were arrested, he could muster courage to make his statement.
During cross-examination, PW-2 admitted that he had been arrested under section 60 of the Excise
Act and is on bail. He feigned ignorance to a suggestion that his bail bonds were arranged by parents
of Chhotu.
(iii) PW-3 – Urmila Devi-Mother of the deceased She proved that on 31.10.2001, Babloo (PW-7),
who use to work at the cinema hall, came to her house to fetch food for the deceased, consequently,
food was cooked and supplied by her.
During cross examination, she denied being a surety for the bail of Chandan (PW-2). However, she
admitted that Chandan used to visit her house.
(iv) PW-4 – Smt. Mithilesh (Wife of Govind) PW-4 did not depose anything specific about the
incident except that Shabbir had enmity with her husband and 8 to 10 days before the murder of
Chhotu, Ravi Bangali and Shabbir had called her husband; in consequence, her husband left, but did
Ravi Mandal vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154059911/
3
not return thereafter; later, she received information from the police that her husband has been
killed and the culprits caught.
During cross examination, she admitted that the police had come to her house 2-3 days after the
murder of Chhotu but, at that time, she had not informed the police that Govind and Chhotu had
gone with the accused persons. She also admitted that the police made no enquiry from her and she
did not lodge any complaint in respect of her husband’s murder.
(v) PW-5 – Mahendra Khurana He stated that,— on 31.10.2001, while he was watching a night show
at the cinema hall, he had to rush out to attend to nature’s call, then he saw Chhotu (the deceased),
Ravi Bangali and Shabbir going towards the forest; 2-3 minutes later, he heard sound of a gunshot
and 5-7 minutes later, Ravi Bangali and Shabbir minus Chhotu were noticed running and talking to
each other that they have settled their account with Chhotu as he had become a nuisance for them
on account of his persistent demand for money. PW-5 stated that he did not disclose this fact to
anyone in the night but in the morning, he came to know that Chhotu has been murdered.
During cross examination, he admitted that though toilet facility is available in the cinema hall but,
on charge; therefore, he went out to ease himself. He stated that his statement was recorded in the
morning, following the night of the incident; and for that purpose, he was called by the constable.
On being confronted with his previous statement that he saw Govind, Chhotu, Ravi Bangali and
Shabbir going towards the forest, PW-5 stated that he had disclosed the name of all, except Govind.
He, however, admitted that he did not disclose to the police the place where he sat that night to ease
himself.
(vi) PW-6 – Hanuman Prasad He stated that,— on 31.10.2001 at about mid- night while he was
returning from depot no.6, opposite to the cinema hall, he saw three persons, namely, Chhotu, Ravi
Bangali and Shabbir talking to each other and going towards the forest; next day in the morning, he
came to know that Chhotu has been murdered. He denied having seen Shabbir firing at the
deceased. At this stage, the prosecution declared him hostile and sought his cross examination.
During cross examination by the prosecution, he denied that he gave a statement before the police
about Shabbir shooting his companion and Ravi holding his leg.
During cross examination by the defence, he stated that he had not seen the incident and he had
also informed the police that he had not seen the incident.
(vii) PW-7 – Babloo He stated that,— on 31.10.2001, he met Chhotu at the gate of cinema hall;
Chhotu asked him to get food for him from his residence; at that time, no one was present with
Chhotu. PW-7 stated that he came to the residence of Chhotu, took food and brought it in three
boxes but when he reached there with the food, he saw no one, therefore, he kept the food there.
Next day morning, he came to know that Chhotu has been killed. At this stage, the prosecution
declared him hostile and sought permission for his cross examination.
Ravi Mandal vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154059911/
4
During cross examination by the prosecution, PW-7 admitted his signature on paper No.3/15 which
was marked Ex. Ka-6. He also admitted that he gave a statement to the sub-inspector but denied
that he saw Chhotu in the company of Shabbir and Ravi Bangali on 31.10.2001.
During cross examination at the instance of defence, PW-7 stated that he used to sell chana (gram)
at the cinema hall; the cinema hall had toilets and no money is charged for use of those toilets. He
also stated that during the course of investigation of this case, the police had beaten him and had
detained him in the police lock-up for three days.
(viii) PW-8 – Dr. Anil Chandra K Sah (Autopsy surgeon) He proved the autopsy report and stated
that death of the deceased was due to shock and haemorrhage as a result of ante mortem gunshot.
(ix) PW-9 – Sub-Inspector Nanhe Lal (Investigating Officer of the cases under the Arms Act) He
proved the inquest report (Ex. Ka-7A) and autopsy related papers (Ex.K-8 to K-10). He also proved
various stages of investigation of case crime No.756/01, under section 25 of Arms Act, and case
crime No.757/01, under section 4/25 of Arms Act, as also submission of charge sheet and obtaining
of sanction for prosecution under the provisions of the Arms Act.
During cross examination, PW-9 stated that on 06.12.2001 he prepared site plan of the place from
where the accused were arrested and weapon was recovered. He sought to explain the delay in
preparation of the site plan by stating that he was busy with other matters.
(x) PW-10 – SI Pramod Kumar Shah (Investigating Officer of the murder case) He proved —
registration of the FIR; visiting the spot with PW-9; inspection of the spot; preparation of site plan
(Ex.Ka-15); lifting of: blood stained soil/plain soil, vide seizure memo Ex. Ka- 4, and one empty 12
bore cartridge from the spot, vide seizure memo Ex.Ka-5 of which PW-1 is one of the witnesses;
conducting inquest; recording statement of — complainant Man Singh (PW-1), Babloo (PW-7) and
Mahender Khurana (PW-5); preparation of custody memo of the tiffin; recording statement of —
Smt. Urmila Devi (PW-
3) on 02.11.2001, Mithilesh (PW-4) on 03.11.2001, Hanuman (PW-6) on 07.11.2001; submission of
application by Man Singh on 10.11.2001; and submission of charge sheet (EX.Ka-16). He also
produced material exhibits etc. In addition to the above, he stated that accused Shabbir and Ravi
Mandal were absconding, therefore, application to draw proceedings under section 82 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short “Cr.P.C.”) was moved. Thereafter, on 24.11.2001 at 1530 Hours
accused Shabbir and Ravi Mandal were arrested with a 12 bore country made pistol and knife
respectively. He proved the arrest memo as Ex. Ka-17.
PW-10 stated that on 15.01.2002 the country made pistol, empty cartridge recovered from the spot
and live cartridge seized at the time of arrest were sent to Forensic Science Laboratory (FSL), Agra
for examination and its report has been submitted, as per which, EC-1 (empty cartridge found near
the dead body) was fired from the pistol which was recovered from Shabbir.
Ravi Mandal vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154059911/
5
During cross examination, at the instance of accused Shabbir, PW-10 stated that, — in the FIR
Shabbir was not named; PW-10 reached the place of occurrence at about 0800 Hours; the dead
body was lying at the spot; the statement of Man Singh was recorded at the spot on 01.11.2001; Man
Singh had informed him that Chhotu (the deceased) had not been coming home since last 10-12
days before the incident, however, no information regarding Chhotu was given earlier;
Mahender Khurana (PW-5) had told that in the night he had seen Govind with Ravi, Chhotu and
Shabbir going towards the forest; Man Singh on 01.11.2001 had stated that Govind had borrowed
Rs.16,000/- from Chhotu; Man Singh’s (PW-1’s) statement was recorded thrice; Chandan Singh
(PW-2) gave an affidavit on 18.02.2002, prior to that he did not come; Urmila Devi, whose
statement was recorded on 02.11.2001 at her residence, did not disclose that PW-2 had seen the
accused persons; and Mithilesh’s (PW-4’s) statement was recorded twice, one on 03.11.2001 and the
other on 05.12.2001. PW-10 also stated that on their arrest Shabbir and Ravi had confessed that
before killing Chhotu, they had killed Govind.
PW-10 further stated that statement of Mahender Khurana (PW-5) was recorded on 01.11.2001 at
his residence; and PW-5 had not disclosed the place where he sat to ease himself that fateful night.
With regard to the sequence of events on the day of arrest of the two accused, PW-10 stated that, —
on 24.11.2001, he had received information from an informer that at 1600 Hours accused persons
were to come to their house; the said information was received at about 1430 Hours; on receipt of
the information, PW-10 and his team arrived at the spot in their Jeep, which was hidden in the
forest at some distance; after 10-15 minutes, PW-10 saw the accused persons coming and were
accordingly arrested. PW-10 accepted that he did not try to rope in any public witness because the
spot where arrest was effected was 200 meters away from the locality. PW-10 also stated that the
site plan of the place of arrest and recovery was prepared on 06.12.2001 at his instance. PW-10
denied the suggestions that,— the dead body was brought by the complainant to the police station;
the second complaint (Ex.Ka-2) was got written at his instance; and the accused were falsely
implicated by preparing false documents while sitting at the police station.
PW-10 admitted that,— the deceased had criminal antecedents and had gone to jail many times;
Mahender Khurana (PW-5) had not come to him for getting his statement recorded, rather PW- 10
went to his house to record his statement; Mahender Khurana’s statement was recorded four hours
after information was provided by Man Singh (PW-1) on 01.11.2011; Mahender Khurana in his
statement had told that Govind was also present.
Statement under section 313 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (Cr.P.C.):-
6. In his statement recorded under section 313 Cr.P.C., Ravi Mandal denied the incriminating
circumstances put to him. He also denied recovery of the knife and claimed that nothing
incriminating was recovered from his possession. However, he led no evidence in defence.
7. Similarly, Shabbir Ahmad in his statement under section 313 Cr.P.C. denied the incriminating
circumstances appearing against him and stated that nothing incriminating was recovered from his
Ravi Mandal vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154059911/
6
possession. However, what is pertinent to note is that the ballistic expert report with regard to the
use of the pistol allegedly recovered from Shabbir was not put to him while recording his statement
under section 313 Cr.P.C.
Trial Court Findings:-
8. The Trial Court relied on the testimonies of PW- 2 (Chandan Singh) and PW-5 (Mahendra
Khurana) to conclude that the deceased was last seen alive in the company of the accused going
towards that forest/place from where body of the deceased was recovered; that PW-5 heard noise of
gunshot coming from the forest soon after the deceased and the two accused entered that forest and,
soon thereafter, saw the accused exiting that place minus the deceased. This, according to the Trial
Court, was a clinching circumstance. The Trial Court also used the testimony of other witnesses
including PW-6 to corroborate the testimony of the two main witnesses with regard to the deceased
being last seen alive with the two accused around midnight in that area from where, next day
morning, dead body of the deceased was recovered. The Trial Court noticed that there was no
dispute with regard to the presence of moonlight on that night and there was no challenge to the
capacity of the witnesses to identify the accused and the deceased. The Trial Court also noticed that
as per FSL report the empty cartridge recovered from the spot was fired from the same pistol which
was recovered from the possession of Shabbir. And since the autopsy report had confirmed that
death of the deceased was caused by use of firearm, the Trial Court concluded that it was proved
beyond doubt that the accused persons had committed murder of the deceased and to hide the
evidence dumped the body of the deceased in the forest. They were thus convicted and sentenced
accordingly.
High Court Findings:-
9. The High Court upheld the conviction upon finding the prosecution evidence reliable and
corroborative of each other.
10. We have heard Ms. Ankita Gautam for the appellant Ravi Mandal; Mr. Gopal Jha, learned
Amicus Curiae, for Shabbir; and Mr. Jatinder Kumar Bhatia for the State of Uttarakhand, and have
perused the record.
Submissions on behalf of the appellant Ravi Mandal:-
11. On behalf of Ravi Mandal, it was submitted that insofar as the evidence of the deceased being last
seen in the company of the two accused is concerned, neither PW-1 (father of the deceased) nor
PW-3 (mother of the deceased) had seen the deceased in the company of the two accused on
31.10.2001. Babloo (PW-7) though disclosed that on 31.10.2001 he met Chhotu (the deceased) but
he did not depose about any of the two accused being with him. Insofar as the testimony of PW-2
(Chandan Singh) is concerned, no reliance is to be placed on it as he is not a witness arrayed in the
chargesheet and there is no cogent explanation as to why he did not make a disclosure earlier.
Moreover, he is a chance witness whose presence at the spot finds no proper explanation. Similarly,
PW-5 too is a chance witness whose explanation for his presence at the spot, at that odd hour, is
Ravi Mandal vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154059911/
7
falsified by statement of PW-7 and PW-10. And insofar as PW-6 is concerned, he has been declared
hostile. Thus, there is no reliable evidence of the deceased being last seen alive with the two accused.
12. In addition to the above, it was argued that the testimony regarding recovery of weapons from
the accused does not appear convincing as there is no public witness to it; the site plan of the place
of arrest and recovery was prepared several days after the alleged recovery which would suggest that
there existed no place of recovery and arrest but, as an after thought, to complete the formality, the
site plan was prepared.
13. It was also argued that there is material discrepancy in the deposition of witnesses as to whether
the FIR was lodged before, or after the dead body was brought to the police station. The statement of
PW-1 suggests that he was informed by the police about his son’s body being found, whereupon he
went to the spot and brought the dead body to the police station to lodge the FIR; whereas, police
witnesses state that they proceeded to the spot after PW-1 had lodged the report and at the spot they
carried out inquest proceeding. It was urged that this discrepancy creates doubt as to whether the
prosecution case was developed on guess work at the instance of the police. This doubt gets doubled
because the name of Govind appeared in the first written report. And when it was found that Govind
had already expired, the name of Govind was substituted with Shabbir. It was argued that from the
evidence led, it is clear that the deceased was a person with criminal antecedents and therefore,
could have had several enemies. Hence, according to the defence counsel, it is a case where in the
night someone killed the son of PW-1; upon discovering his body, story was developed on the basis
of guess work and so were the accused implicated. It was urged that the Trial Court and the High
Court did not properly test the prosecution evidence and, therefore, the judgments of the two courts
below are liable to be set aside.
Submissions on behalf of the appellant Shabbir:-
14. The learned Amicus Curiae representing Shabbir adopted the submissions made by the learned
counsel representing appellant Ravi Mandal and added that Shabbir was not named in the initial
report. The statement of the witnesses would suggest that money was lent to Govind. Chhotu (the
deceased) was demanding his money back from Govind and therefore, Govind had the motive.
Consequently, on the basis of suspicion, the name of Govind was mentioned but when it was found
that Govind is not traceable, or was possibly killed, Shabbir’s name was substituted in place of
Govind. In such circumstances, the implication of Shabbir is shrouded in suspicion and the
prosecution story insofar as it relates to Shabbir, is not acceptable. The learned Amicus Curiae
claimed that the alleged recovery of country made pistol is bogus and false which has no public
witness to support. The ballistic report has also been questioned on the ground that there is no
explanation as to why the country made pistol was not sent for forensic examination before
15.01.2002, when it was allegedly recovered on 24.11.2001. It was also argued that the ballistic
report has not been put to the accused while recording his statement under section 313 Cr.P.C.,
hence it would have to be eschewed from consideration.
Submissions on behalf of the State:-
Ravi Mandal vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154059911/
8
15. Per contra, learned counsel for the State submitted that PW-7 proved that the deceased had
called for food to the cinema hall; PW-1 and PW-3 have corroborated PW-7 by stating that the food
was supplied for three persons including the deceased; and PW-2 and PW-5 have proved that they
saw the deceased and the two accused together at around midnight near the place from where dead
body of the deceased was recovered next day morning. Therefore, the chain is complete to nail the
accused. It was argued that the defence has not been able to demonstrate that PW-5 and PW-2 were
inimical to the accused. Hence, there is no reason for them to lie. Moreover, defence has not
questioned the capacity of either PW-2 or PW-5 to recognise the accused and Chhotu. There is also
no question put to PW-5 to doubt the presence of moonlight. All the witnesses have stated that it
was a full moonlight and there is no challenge to this statement. In such circumstances, the
testimony of PW-5 is reliable. Consequently, the Trial Court and the High Court were justified in
placing reliance on the same.
16. With regard to the testimony of PW-2, the learned counsel for the State submitted that PW-2
might not have been prompt in making a disclosure to the police about the incident, but his
testimony cannot be discarded merely on that ground because, here is a case where the accused
were criminals, apprehension in the mind of witnesses cannot be ruled out.
17. In respect of the testimony of PW-6, it was argued that he too supported the prosecution case
with regard to the deceased being with the accused that fateful evening; therefore, his testimony
could be used to corroborate the testimony of other witnesses.
18. The learned counsel for the State summed up his submissions by stating that the last seen
circumstance has been proved to the hilt; the recovery of country made pistol has also been proved
which along with forensic report connects the recovered weapon with the empty cartridge found at
the spot; the autopsy report/ medical evidence proves that death was a consequence of gunshot and
also accepts the possibility of death in the night hours of 31.10.2001 when the deceased was last seen
alive with the accused therefore, the chain of circumstances is complete, leaving no room of doubt
with regard to the guilt of the accused. Hence, the conviction recorded by the Trial Court, affirmed
by the appellate court, calls for no interference.
Discussion and Analysis:-
19. We have considered the rival submissions and have perused the records carefully. The striking
feature of the case is that the FIR of the case was lodged at 0730 Hours on 01.11.2001 after the dead
body of informant’s son was found in a forest. According to the testimony of police witnesses, it was
the informant who gave information to the police about his son’s dead body being found in the
forest and thereafter, on the basis of the FIR, investigation commenced. Whereas, according to
PW-1 the police informed him that his son’s dead body has been found in the forest and thereafter,
he went to the spot, brought the body to the police station and then lodged the report. This cleavage
in the testimony of prosecution witnesses is important because it would throw a question as to
whether the prosecution case is based on informant’s own knowledge and information or on
suggestions/guess work, may be at the instance of the police.
Ravi Mandal vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154059911/
9
20. In the FIR there is no disclosure as to how the body was found in that forest. The only disclosure
in the FIR is that on 31.10.2001 at about 2100 Hours, the informant’s son was seen in the company
of his friends Govind (non-accused) and Ravi Bangali. As to who had seen the deceased in the
company of the aforesaid two persons is not disclosed in the FIR. No doubt, an FIR is not required
to be an encyclopedia and there is no requirement to name all the witnesses from whom information
is sourced, but, what is important is that, in the FIR, in addition to Ravi Bangali, suspicion is
expressed against one Govind, who is stated to be a criminal and a person influencing informant’s
son to take a wrong path, and there is no disclosure about Shabbir i.e. one of the appellants. What is
also strikingly absent in the FIR is that Chhotu (the deceased) and his friends, on that fateful
evening, were to watch a night show of a movie and, therefore, Chhotu had sent PW-7 to fetch food
from his parents (i.e. PW-1 and PW-3).
21. The prosecution story which develops later is to the effect that PW-7 (Babloo) was sent by
Chhotu to fetch food for him and his friends from his house and Chhotu’s mother (PW-3) sent the
food in tiffin boxes. This part of the story is completely absent in the FIR even though it was lodged
by father of the deceased who, as per his deposition, was having information about it. All of this
would give rise to a suspicion as to whether the later improvements in the story were to create link
evidence with the help of newly introduced witnesses. This suspicion is fortified by PW-10’s
deposition that during investigation PW-1 had disclosed that the deceased had not been coming
home and, therefore, to test whether the request of PW-7 to pack food for the deceased was real or
not, PW-1 had followed PW-7 and then he saw Chhotu, Ravi Bangali together and at some distance
Shabbir was also there. Notably, PW-1 made no such disclosure during his deposition in Court. It is
therefore clear that there was a deliberate attempt to multiply the witnesses. Another important
improvement in the prosecution case is with regard to its edifice i.e. the motive. Initially, the motive
for the crime was enmity with Govind. But, later, when Govind was found not alive, he was replaced
by Shabbir as an accused. All these circumstances taken cumulatively create a doubt in our mind as
to whether it is a quintessential case of a blind murder (i.e. taking place at a secluded place in the
darkness of night where no one could witness the crime), therefore, to solve the case, while groping
for witnesses, the prosecution story kept evolving, either on the basis of information received from
time to time, or on guess work emanating from strong suspicion, or police suggestions. In that
backdrop, in our view, this is a case where the testimony of prosecution witnesses, regardless of they
having no proven grudge against the accused, was required to be strictly scrutinised with a degree of
circumspection to ascertain whether it is credible, reliable/trustworthy and truthful, before basing a
conviction thereupon.
22. In light of the above, when we scrutinise the prosecution evidence, we find that the prosecution
case is primarily based on the evidence of the deceased being last seen alive with the two accused
near the place of occurrence on or about the probable time of occurrence i.e. around midnight of
31.10.2001/ 01.11.2001. Such evidence is forthcoming from two witnesses, namely, PW-2 (Chandan
Singh) and PW-5 (Mahender Khurana). Insofar as PW-6 is concerned, we do not consider him
reliable, because, firstly, he was set up as an eye witness of Shabbir firing a gun shot at the deceased
but he denied having witnessed such gunshot and, secondly, during cross examination, he stated
that he had not seen the incident.
Ravi Mandal vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154059911/
10
23. Insofar as PW-2 is concerned, admittedly, he is not listed as a witness in the police report/charge
sheet. He gave his statement to the police on an affidavit for the first time on 18.02.2002, that is, the
date when the police report was prepared. This implies that he remained silent for as long as three
and a half months. In Kali Ram v. State of Himachal Pradesh1, a three Judge bench of this Court,
while discarding the testimony of one of the witnesses who (1973) 2 SCC 808 made a delayed
disclosure of the incriminating circumstances of which he was aware much earlier, held/observed:
“14. … We find it difficult to accept this part of the deposition of Parma Nand. Parma
Nand admits that he came to know of the murder of Dhianu and Nanti about four
days after those persons were found to have been murdered. It would, therefore,
follow that Parma Nand came to know of the murder of Dhianu and Nanti on or
about October 4, 1968. Had the accused left for the house of Dhianu deceased on the
evening of September 29 and had Parma Nand PW come to know that Dhianu and
Nanti were murdered in their house, this fact must have aroused the suspicion of
Parma Nand regarding the complicity of the accused. Parma Nand, however, kept
quiet in the matter and did not talk of it. The statement of Parma Nand was recorded
by the police on December 11, 1968. If a witness professes to know about a gravely
incriminating circumstance against a person accused of the offence of murder and
the witness keeps silent for over two months regarding the said incriminating
circumstance against the accused, his statement relating to the incriminating
circumstance, in the absence of any cogent reason, is bound to lose most of its value.
No cogent reason has been shown to us as to why Parma Nand kept quiet for over two
months after coming to know of the murder of Dhianu and Nanti about the fact that
the accused had left for the house of the deceased shortly before the murder. We are,
therefore, not prepared to place any reliance upon the second part of the deposition
of Parma Nand.” (Emphasis supplied)
24. Taking note of the legal principle extracted above, we have to examine whether, for the delay in
disclosure, there was a cogent explanation offered by PW-2. In the instant case, the only explanation
offered by PW-2 for his three and a half month’s silence is that he felt threatened. With regard to his
threat perception, PW-2 stated that in the night of the incident when he witnessed Ravi Bangali and
Shabbir Ahmad emerging from the forest, soon after the incident, he noticed their hands and clothes
blood stained. On spotting PW-2, those two accused threatened him by saying that if he (PW-2) tells
to anyone about what he has seen, he would meet the same fate. PW-2 stated that with the arrest of
the two accused his fear vanished, therefore, he is now appearing as a witness. In our view, if this
was the reason for him not to make the disclosure earlier, there should have been a prompt
disclosure by him once the accused were arrested. Notably, the two accused were arrested on
24.11.2001, yet, till 18.2.2002 no disclosure was made by him. Therefore, in our considered view, the
explanation offered by him for the delay in making disclosure is not confidence inspiring.
25. Assuming that we accept the explanation for the delay in making the disclosure, considering the
place and time of occurrence, the presence of PW-2 at the spot does not appear natural, particularly,
at that odd hour of the night. To explain his presence at the scene of crime, PW-2 stated that his
parents stay at another place in Mohalla Khatta and, therefore, to meet them he visited them that
Ravi Mandal vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154059911/
11
fateful night and on way return he could witness the incident. During cross examination, PW-2
stated that he usually takes dinner at 2100 Hours with his family; and that he used to visit his
parents at least once a week. According to PW- 2, that fateful night he left his house to visit his
parents after having dinner in his own house and on way return, at 0030 Hours he witnessed the
incident. This explanation is not confidence inspiring, particularly, because his parents have not
been interrogated or examined to corroborate PW-2’s visit to their house at that odd hour of the
night. In our view, PW-2 is a mere chance witness, whose presence at the spot, at that hour, is not
satisfactorily explained therefore, bearing in mind that he kept silent for unusually long i.e. for more
than three and a half months, his testimony is not worthy of any credit. In our view, the courts below
erred by placing reliance on his testimony.
26. As regards the testimony of PW-5 (Mahender Khurana) he too, is a chance witness. As to when
testimony of a chance witness could be relied, the law is settled, which is, that the evidence of a
chance witness requires a very cautious and close scrutiny and a chance witness must adequately
explain his presence at the place of occurrence. Deposition of a chance witness whose presence at
the place of incident remains doubtful should be discarded (See: Rajesh Yadav & Another v. State of
Uttar Pradesh2; and, Jarnail Singh & Others v. State of Punjab3.
27. The explanation offered by PW-5 for his presence at the spot at that odd hour appears false.
According to PW-5, he was having an upset stomach, therefore, while watching a night show of a
movie, to attend to nature’s call, he came out of the cinema hall and, while he was easing himself, he
got the chance to witness the incident. It be noted that the investigating officer (PW-10) and PW-7, a
gram vendor in that cinema hall, have deposed that there are toilets in the cinema hall where no
money is charged for their use. This falsifies the explanation of PW-5 that he went out of the cinema
hall to ease himself because cinema hall charged money for use of the toilet. Otherwise also, PW-10
(the investigating officer) in his deposition had stated that he was not shown the place where PW-5
squatted to ease himself.
2 (2022) 12 SCC 200 3 (2009) 9 SCC 719
28. Besides that, PW-5 is not consistent because, in his statement under section 161 Cr.P.C., with
which he was confronted during the course of his deposition, he had indicted Govind, Ravi Bangali
and Shabbir by stating that all three were present with the deceased but, during his deposition in
Court, he stated that Govind was not present. He is also not consistent with regard to the place
where his statement was recorded. At one place he states that it was recorded at the police station
and at another place he states that it was recorded at his shop.
29. Another important feature of the case is that, according to PW-10 (investigating Officer), PW-5’s
statement was recorded by him on 01.11.2001 at PW- 5’s house. What was the reason for the police
to go to the residence of PW-5 to record his statement is not disclosed by the prosecution. We find it
inexplicable as to why police would go to PW-5’s residence to record his statement when the FIR
makes no disclosure about PW-5’s presence at the scene of crime or with regard to his knowledge
about the incident. All these circumstances give rise to a lingering doubt in our mind as to whether,
on discovery of the dead body in the forest, the accused were implicated at the instance of the police
Ravi Mandal vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154059911/
12
on suspicion rather than on information received from persons conversant with the facts.
30. For all the reasons above, when we evaluate the testimony of PW-2 and PW-5 carefully and with
due caution, as is required in the facts of the case, we find that their testimony does not inspire our
confidence as to sustain the conviction. Unfortunately, the courts below accepted the same as gospel
truth, without testing it on the anvil of settled legal principles, thereby resulting in grave miscarriage
of justice. We, therefore, conclude that the prosecution has failed to prove beyond reasonable doubt
that the deceased was last seen alive in the company of the accused near the spot at the relevant
time.
31. In so far as recovery of the country made pistol and knife from the person of the accused at the
time of their arrest is concerned, the same does not inspire our confidence for the following reasons
— According to PW-10, the investigating officer, while he was looking out for the suspects/accused,
received an information from an informer that the accused were to come to a specified place at 1600
Hours. But, there is no record of receipt of the said information even though it is stated to have been
received few hours before the action. Assuming that such information was received, there appears
no effort to rope in a public witness even though a locality, as per statement of PW-10, was just 200
meters away from that spot.
Lastly, what is most interesting is that the investigating officer, who investigated the case relating to
the offence punishable under the Arms Act, prepared the site plan of the place of arrest/recovery on
06.12.2001 even though arrest was allegedly effected on 24.11.2001, which, in the facts of the case,
would suggest that it was an exercise to complete the formality. Moreover, the site plan does not
disclose the place where the Jeep was hidden in the forest to ambush the accused. Having regard to
the circumstances noted above, including the fact that Shabbir was not named as a suspect in the
FIR and his name cropped up later in the statement of PW-5, whose statement was recorded on the
same day at his residence, even though, he was not cited as a witness in the FIR, bearing in mind the
statement of PW-1 that the police made him to submit the second report indicting Shabbir, we are of
the view that the police had shown extraordinary interest in implicating Shabbir and therefore, for
all the reasons above, the alleged recovery of gun and knife shown from the appellants does not
inspire our confidence. In our considered view, it would be unsafe to rely on such recovery to sustain
the conviction.
32. Insofar as forensic report/ballistic report is concerned, the same has not even been put to
Shabbir, from whom the country made pistol was seized, while recording his statement under
section 313 of Cr.P.C., therefore, in any event, it would have to be eschewed from consideration.
Conclusion:-
33. In light of the discussion above, we are of the considered view that the case in hand is a
quintessential case where to solve out a blind murder, occurring in a forest in the darkness of night,
bits and pieces of evidence were collected which warranted a strict scrutiny before basing a
conviction thereupon. On putting the prosecution evidence to strict scrutiny and testing the same on
the anvil of settled legal principles as discussed above, we find the evidence not confidence inspiring
Ravi Mandal vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154059911/
13
as to uphold the conviction of the accused appellants. In our view, the courts below have failed to
properly evaluate and test the evidence by applying the correct legal principles. In such
circumstances, the judgments of the courts below are liable to be set aside. Consequently, the
appeals are allowed. The impugned judgment and orders of the High Court and the Trial Court are
set aside. The appellants are acquitted of all the charges for which they have been tried and
convicted.
34. The appellants are reportedly on bail, they need not surrender. Their bail-bonds, if any, are
discharged. In case they are not on bail, they shall be released forthwith unless wanted in any other
case.
....................................J. (Hrishikesh Roy) ....................................J. (Manoj Misra) New Delhi;
May 18, 2023
Ravi Mandal vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154059911/
14
