Supreme Court of India
Salem Muslim Burial Ground ... vs State Of Tamil Nadu And Ors. on 18 May, 2023
Author: V. Ramasubramanian
Bench: V. Ramasubramanian, Pankaj Mithal
                                                                         REPORTABLE
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                      CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 7467-7470 OF 2014
          SALEM MUSLIM BURIAL GROUND
          PROTECTION COMMITTEE                                          …APPELLANT
                                                    VERSUS
          STATE OF TAMIL NADU AND ORS.                               …RESPONDENTS
          PANKAJ MITHAL, J.
1. Under challenge in these appeals is the judgment and order passed by the Division Bench of the
High Court of Judicature at Madras allowing the writ appeals whereby and wherein the judgment
and order of the learned Single judge dated 29.04.2005 declaring the suit land as wakf property has
been set aside.
2. The controversy in the present appeals centers around land in Signature Not Verified Zamin
Survey Nos. 5105 and 5108 in Salem Zameen Estate Digitally signed by POOJA SHARMA Date:
2023.05.18 which corresponds to O.T.S. Nos. 2253 and 2210 respectively. 16:24:19 IST Reason:
The O.T.S. 2253 has been allotted New Town Survey No. 1 (T.S.
No.1) and O.T.S 2210 has been allotted New Town Survey, i.e. T.S. Nos. 113 & 70.
3. In the present appeals, we are only concerned with the Zamin Survey No.5108 (O.T.S.2210, now
T.S. Nos.113 & 70) only which henceforth shall be described as “suit land”.
4. The appellant herein is Salem Muslim Burial Ground Protection Committee, Salem1. The State of
Tamil Nadu (Revenue Department) is respondent No.1, and respondent Nos.2 and 3 are
Commercial Taxes and Religious Endowments and the Director of Survey and Settlement Office
respectively, who are formal parties. Respondent Nos.4 to 23 are the claimants, who alleged that
they are residing over the “suit land” and are the settlers thereon from times immemorial having
acquired rights over it through their predecessors-in-interest. The old records reveal that the “suit
Salem Muslim Burial Ground ... vs State Of Tamil Nadu And Ors. on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/137942978/
1
land” at one point of time was used as a burial ground paramboke but the municipality ordered its
closure for health reasons somewhere in the year 1867 and an alternative site was allotted for use as
a burial ground. hereinafter referred to as “appellant Committee”
5. One of the claimants respondents, Perumal Chettiar claimed Ryotwari patta in the “suit land”.
Three other sets of respondents claimants’ namely, A. Ramaswamy Chettiar, Govinda Pillai and
appellant Committee through Sri Abdul Salim Sahib also set up their claims in the suit land.
Accordingly, Assistant Settlement Officer, Salem2 in March, 1959 initiated inquiry under Section
11(a) of the Tamil Nadu Estate (Abolition & Conversion into Ryotwari) Act 19483.
6. The aforesaid Section 11 of the Abolition Act, 1948 provides that every ryot in an estate shall with
effect from the notified date, be entitled to a ryotwari patta in respect of ryotwari lands which as per
Madras Estate Land Act, 19084 means cultivable land in an estate other than the private land
excluding certain types of lands, such as village sites and those set apart for common use of the
villagers.
7. In the aforesaid inquiry initiated by the ASO under Section 11(a), Perumal Chettiar claimed that
the “suit land” was assigned to him by the zamindar of Salem vide Exhibit A1 dated 20.01.1935. He
relied upon Exhibits A2 and A3 which were 2 hereinafter referred to as “ASO” 3 hereinafter referred
to as “Abolition Act, 1948” 4 hereinafter referred to as “Estate Act” pattas granted to him in respect
of the suit land by the then zamindar. On the basis of the aforesaid assignment and the pattas, he
claimed himself to be in possession of the “suit land” ever since the date of assignment and contends
that the muslims have never buried their dead bodies on the said land.
8. Simultaneously, A.Ramaswamy Chettiar claims to have purchased some portion of the suit land
from one Ramaswami Pillai, Manickam Pillai, Subhu Pandaram and Vasudeva Chettiar for a sum of
Rs.5000/- some time in the year 1954. He asserted his claim on the basis of mortgage deeds
(Exhibits B2 to B7) executed by him in respect of the “suit land” in favour of various parties.
9. The other claimant Govinda Pillai staked his claim over the suit land, on the basis of title of his
predecessors-in-interest as told to him by his father whereas the appellant Committee asserted that
it is a burial ground, and it can’t be settled with any private person.
10. The ASO vide order dated 31.03.1959 dismissed the claims of all parties observing that the “suit
land” is communal in nature and that any assignment of the said land was not possible without the
declaration of the Collector under Section 20A of the Estate Act. The ASO further observed that
there had been no burials on the “suit land” for the last 60 years and that there exist only 2 tombs on
T.S. No.2253 and there is absolutely no sign of any burial on the “suit land” which in fact was never
used as a burial ground.
11. Both the claimants - Perumal Chettiar and A. Ramaswamy Chettiar filed separate revisions
against the above order of the ASO before the Settlement Officer, Salem. The revisions were
dismissed by the Settlement Officer on the same reasoning as that of ASO vide order dated
03.10.1959. It was held that the claimants are not entitled to ryotwari patta on the “suit land”.
Salem Muslim Burial Ground ... vs State Of Tamil Nadu And Ors. on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/137942978/
2
12. The orders of the ASO and the Settlement Officer were taken up by means of revisions before the
Director of Survey & Settlement by the above two claimants respondents, but even those revisions
came to be dismissed on 31.01.1960. Subsequently, the revision petitions before the Board of
Revenue were also dismissed. Aggrieved by the above orders starting from that of the ASO,
Settlement Officer, Director of Survey & Settlement and Board of Revenue, writ petitions were filed
by different claimants in respect of the “suit land”, including writ petition Nos.903 and 1258 of 1960
by A.Ramaswamy Chettiar and Perumal Chettiar respectively and both of them claimed ryotwari
patta under Section 11 of the Abolition Act in respect of the “suit land”.
13. The writ court by means of a common judgment and order dated 03.05.1962 dismissed all the
petitions holding that the character of the land once burial ground would not change only for the
reason that it had not been used for burial purposes since 1900 or that no burial has taken place on
the said land. It was also observed that the “suit land” was never used as a burial ground and that
the burial ground must have been on part of T.S. 2253 and the two sites stand separated by a trunk
road.
14. Not satisfied by the decision of the writ court, the claimant A.Ramaswamy Chettiar along with
some others preferred writ appeals before the Division Bench. The writ appeals were dismissed vide
judgment and order dated 12.01.1965 but with the following observation:
“… in each of these cases, we would commend the claim of the concerned petitioner
to a recognition by government, of his right to continue in possession under section
19A of Madras Act 26 of 1948, subject, of course to all consideration that could be
urged to the contrary effect by the Muslim Burial Ground Committee, or any person
interested in claiming, even at present time the communal user or nature of the
property in question. Further, our remarks are subject to the condition that the
petitioners claiming under section 19A of Act 26 of 1948 are bonafide alienees for
value, who have taken such properties and put them to private uses, in the genuine
belief that they were dealing with land in the private ownership of vendors from the
Zamindar and not with communal land.
The erection of buildings thereon by these persons may also be considered as
evidence of bonafides and a fact entitling them, on equitable considerations to the
benefit of action under section 19A of the Act.”
15. The above observation and direction of the Division Bench is the bone of
contention leading to the present appeals.
16. The aforesaid direction of the Division Bench was not questioned by any party in any higher
forum or even otherwise rather the appellant Committee herein accepted the said order by
participating in the consequential proceedings without any reservation.
17. The Director of Survey and Settlement on the strength of the above directions of the Division
Bench of the High Court initiated proceedings under Section 19A of the Abolition Act and finally
Salem Muslim Burial Ground ... vs State Of Tamil Nadu And Ors. on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/137942978/
3
accepted the claims set up by claimants A.Ramaswamy Chettiar and others vide order dated
31.01.1975. It was held that they have purchased the “suit land” for valuable consideration from
persons who occupied the “suit land” for a very long time and that it was not required for the
purposes of burial.
18. Aggrieved by the decision of the Director of Survey and Settlement conferring rights upon
claimants under Section 19A of the Abolition Act, the appellant Committee preferred revision before
the Commissioner of Land Revenue, Madras. It was dismissed on 20.04.1976. The Revenue
department issued G.O.Ms.No.453 dated 14.03.1990, accepting and confirming the order of the
Director of Survey and Settlement allowing the claimants respondents to remain in possession over
the “suit land”. At this stage, the appellant Committee invoked the writ jurisdiction of the High
Court by filing writ petition No.6300 of 1990 challenging the Government order issued by the
Revenue department. Another writ petition to the same effect was preferred by A.Annamalai and 13
others. It was contended that the Commissioner of Land Revenue had dismissed the revision against
the order of the Director of Survey and Settlement without affording proper opportunity of hearing
to them. The said writ petitions were dismissed whereupon the appellant Committee filed writ
appeals which were allowed on 08.07.1999 and the matter was remitted to the Government to
rehear it and to redecide it within three months.
19. Consequent to the above directions, the matter was reconsidered at the level of the Government
and G.O.Ms.No.676 dated 23.12.1999 was issued observing that since the “suit land” vests in the
Government, it is open for it to grant permission to the claimant respondents under Section 19A of
the Abolition Act to remain in possession of the same.
20. The appellant Committee again preferred writ petition challenging the above G.O.Ms.No.676
dated 23.12.1999 by filing a fresh writ petition No.5985 of 2000. The writ petition was allowed vide
order dated 29.04.2005 on two counts: (i) that the “suit land” is notified to be a wakf property and
as such it cannot be alienated in exercise of powers under Section 19A of the Abolition Act; and (ii)
even if Section 19A is exercised no rights could be conferred upon the claimants respondents in the
absence of any material to show that they were put in possession by the land holders.
21. The claimant respondents, aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment and order of the writ court filed
writ appeal Nos.1327 and 1348 of 2005 respectively which has been allowed by the impugned
judgment and order dated 06.08.2009, after setting aside the order of the writ court, holding that
OTS 2253 is registered as a muslim burial ground which has been handed over to the Wakf Board
whereas the “suit land” (OTS 2210 now T.S. Nos. 113 and
70) is merely recorded as a rudra bhumi with no sign of muslim burial and as such has rightly not
been held to be a wakf property in the order dated 31.01.1975 of the Director of Survey and
Settlement. There is no material on record to establish any dedication of the suit land as a wakf
property and that the notification dated 29.04.1959 regarding the “suit land” as a wakf is
unacceptable; first for the reason that the said notification was not pressed by the appellant
Committee till 1999 before any authority in any case; and secondly, for reason that no evidence was
brought on record to establish that any preliminary survey as contemplated under Section 4 of the
Salem Muslim Burial Ground ... vs State Of Tamil Nadu And Ors. on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/137942978/
4
Wakf Act, 1954 was conducted before issuing the said notification under Section 5 of the Wakf Act.
22. It is in the above background that these appeals have been preferred and have come up for
consideration before us.
23. We had heard Mrs. June Chaudhari, learned senior counsel for the appellant Committee and
Shri Narendra Kumar and Ms. N.S. Nappinai counsel appearing for the respondents.
24. Only two arguments were advanced by Mrs. June before us. The first is that once a wakf is
always a wakf and, therefore, mere non burial of the dead bodies on the “suit land” over the last 60
years or so would not alter its nature so as to confer any right upon the claimants respondents much
less that of ryotwari patta in exercise of power under Section 19A of the Abolition Act; secondly, the
claims of claimants respondents in the suit land having been dismissed by the ASO, Settlement
Officer, Director of Survey and Settlement, Board of Revenue and by the High Court in writ
jurisdiction, the Division Bench of the High Court in exercise of its appellate power could have
either dismissed or allowed the writ appeals but could not have directed for consideration of the
claims under Section 19A of the Abolition Act that too while dismissing the writ appeals.
25. Under the Muslim law, a wakf can be created in several ways but primarily by permanent
dedication of any movable and immovable property by a person professing Islam for any purpose
recognized by Muslim law as pious, religious or charitable purpose and in the absence of such
dedication, it can be presumed to have come into existence by long use.
26. Ordinarily, a wakf is brought into existence by any express dedication of movable or immovable
property for religious or charitable purpose as recognized by Muslim Law. Once such a dedication is
made, the property sought to be dedicated gets divested from the wakif, i.e., the person creating or
dedicating it and vests in the Almighty Allah. The wakf so created acquires a permanent nature and
cannot be revoked or rescinded subsequently. The property of the wakf is unalienable and cannot be
sold or transferred for private purpose.
27. The dedication resulting in the creation of a wakf may at times in the absence of any express
dedication may also be reasonably inferred from the facts and circumstances of the case such as long
usage of the property as a wakf property provided it has been put to use for religious or public
charitable purposes. In this regard, reference may be had to the Constitution Bench decision of this
Court in M. Siddiq (D) thr. L.Rs. Vs. Mahant Suresh Das and Ors.5
28. In the case at hand, there is no iota of evidence from the very inception as to any express
dedication of the suit land for any pious, religious or charitable purpose by anyone professing Islam.
Therefore, on the admitted facts, the wakf by dedication of the suit land is ruled out.
29. The only issue, therefore, is whether the suit land would constitute a wakf by user as it was used
as a burial ground which practice has been stopped at least for the last over 60 years since the year
1900 or 1867. There is even no concrete evidence on record to prove that the suit land prior to the
year 1900 or 1867 was actually being used as a burial ground (kabristan). Therefore, the alleged use
Salem Muslim Burial Ground ... vs State Of Tamil Nadu And Ors. on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/137942978/
5
of the suit land as burial ground prior to 1900 or 1867 is not sufficient to establish a wakf by user in
the absence of evidence to show that it was so used. Thus, it cannot constitute a wakf by user also.
The alleged recording of the suit land as a kabristan or as a burial ground is a misnomer or a
misconstruction inasmuch as the suit land, if at all, came to be recorded as a rudrabhoomi which
denotes 5 (2020) 1 SCC 1 Hindu cremation ground and not a burial ground or a kabristan.
It was only Zamin Survey No.5105 or O.T.S. No.2253 (new T.S. No.1) with two tombs existing which
alone was recorded as a burial ground. The said land is specifically demarcated and separated from
the suit land. The said burial land had already been handed over to the Wakf Board and its
recording as such would not impact upon the nature of the suit land so as to constitute it to be a
burial ground or a kabristan. Therefore, the suit land was not proved to be a wakf land by long usage
also. There is no evidence to prove creation of a wakf of the suit land either by dedication or by
usage.
30. The another limb of the argument is that the suit land has been declared to be a wakf property
vide notification dated 29.04.1959. In this regard, it has to be noted that such a declaration has to be
in consonance with the provisions of the Wakf Act, 1954 or the Waqf Act, 1995. Both the aforesaid
Acts lay down the procedure for issuing notification declaring any property as a wakf.
31. The Wakf Act, 1954, which actually is relevant for our purpose, provides that, first, a preliminary
survey of wakfs has to be conducted and the Survey Commission shall, after such inquiry as may be
deemed necessary, submit its report to the State Government about certain factors enumerated
therein whereupon the State Government by a notification in the official Gazette direct for a second
survey to be conducted. Once the above procedure of survey is completed and the disputes arising
thereto have been settled, on receipt of the report, the State Government shall forward it to the Wakf
Board. The Wakf Board on examining the same shall publish the list of wakfs in existence with full
particulars in the official Gazette as contemplated under Section 5 of the Act. Similar provisions
exist under the Waqf Act, 1995.
32. A plain reading of the provisions of the above two Acts would reveal that the notification under
Section 5 of both the Acts declaring the list of the wakfs shall only be published after completion of
the process as laid down under Section 4 of the above Acts, which provides for two surveys,
settlement of disputes arising thereto and the submission of the report to the State Government and
to the Board. Therefore, conducting of the surveys before declaring a property a wakf property is a
sine qua non. In the case at hand, there is no material or evidence on record that before issuing
notification under Section 5 of the Wakf Act, 1954, any procedure or the survey was conducted as
contemplated by Section 4 of the Act. In the absence of such a material, the mere issuance of the
notification under Section 5 of the Act would not constitute a valid wakf in respect of the suit land.
Therefore, the notification dated 29.04.1959 is not a conclusive proof of the fact that the suit land is
a wakf property. It is for this reason probably that the appellant Committee had never pressed the
said notification into service up till 1999.
33. In Tamil Nadu Wakf Board Vs. Hathija Ammal (Dead) by Lrs. Etc.6, it was observed that the
Wakf Board should follow the procedure as required under Section 4, 5 and 6 or Section 27 of the
Salem Muslim Burial Ground ... vs State Of Tamil Nadu And Ors. on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/137942978/
6
Wakf Act before notifying the wakfs under Section 5 of the Act.
34. In Madanuri Sri Rama Chandra Murthy Vs. Syed Jalal7, it was observed as under:
“16. Thus, it is amply clear that the conducting of survey by the Survey Commissioner
and preparing a report and forwarding the same to the State or the Wakf Board
precedes the final act of notifying such list in the Official Gazette by the State under
the 1995 Act (it was by the Board under the 1954 Act). As mentioned supra, the list
would be AIR 2002 SC 402 7 (2017) 13 SCC 174 prepared by the Survey
Commissioner after making due enquiry and after valid survey as well as after due
application of mind. The enquiry contemplated under sub-section (3) of Section 4 is
not merely an informal enquiry but a formal enquiry to find out at the grass root
level, as to whether the property is a wakf property or not. Thereafter the Wakf Board
will once again examine the list sent to it with due application of its mind and only
thereafter the same will be sent to the Government for notifying the same in the
Gazette….”
35. It may be noted that Wakf Board is a statutory authority under the Wakf Act. Therefore, the
official Gazette is bound to carry any notification at the instance of the Wakf Board but nonetheless,
the State Government is not bound by such a publication of the notification published in the official
Gazette merely for the reason that it has been so published. In State of Andhra Pradesh Vs. A.P.
State Wakf Board and Ors.8, this Court consisting of one of us (V. Ramasubramanian, J. as a
Member) held that the publication of a notification in the official Gazette has a presumption of
knowledge to the general public just like an advertisement published in the newspaper but such a
notification published at the instance of the Wakf Board in the 2022 SCC OnLine SC 159 State
Gazette is not binding upon the State Government. It means that the notification, if any, published
in the official Gazette at the behest of the Wakf Act giving the lists of the wakfs is not a conclusive
proof that a particular property is a wakf property especially, when no procedure as prescribed
under Section 4 of the Wakf Act has been followed in issuing the same.
36. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we do not find any substance in the argument
that the suit land is or was a wakf property and as such would continue to be a wakf always. In the
absence of any evidence of valid creation of a wakf in respect of the suit property, it cannot be
recognized as a wakf so as to allow it to be continued as a wakf property irrespective of its use or
disuse as a burial ground.
37. Now coming to the second argument of learned counsel for the appellate Committee that the
High Court hearing the writ appeal was only obliged to either allow the writ petition or to dismiss it
and when it had decided to dismiss it, it had no authority of law to issue any direction to the
Government to consider claims under Section 19A of the Abolition Act.
38. The argument, though in the first blush, appears to be attractive but upon deeper scrutiny is
found to be bereft of merits for two reasons; first, the appellant Committee was never aggrieved by
such a direction as it never questioned or challenged it in any higher forum; secondly, the appellant
Salem Muslim Burial Ground ... vs State Of Tamil Nadu And Ors. on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/137942978/
7
Committee appears to have accepted the said decision and the direction contained therein by
participating in the subsequent proceedings before the Director of Survey and Settlement without
any protest or taking any objection in this regard. In such an event and participation of the appellant
Committee in the consequential proceedings debars it from turning around so as to agitate a point
to which it had acquiesced and had virtually given up or accepted.
39. To bring home the point that the appellant Committee had participated in the proceedings
before the Director of Survey and Settlement pursuant to the directions of the Division Bench of the
High Court contained in the judgment and order dated 12.01.1965, it is relevant to reproduce
paragraph 10 of the order of the Director of Survey and Settlement dated 31.01.1975 whereunder the
claimants respondents have been granted relief in exercise of powers under Section 19A of the
Abolition Act:
“The case was posted to 11.00 A.M on 17.1.75. The Secretary of the Muslim Burial
ground protection committee who was present then said that his lawyer is attending
the case. He never request any adjournment. But the lawyer did not attend till 12:00
noon. The case was heard by me and the Secretary was also present. At 1.50 P.M the
advocate for the Muslim Burial ground protection committee was present and filed
necessary vakalat. All of a sudden he requested adjournment and he was informed
that no adjournment would be given at this state since the case was heard in the
presence of the parties who were present in the morning. He wanted to file written
objection statement and was permitted to file it before the rising of the court; at 4
P.M on 17.1.75; the secretary filed his written objection statement.”
40. After having lost in proceedings before the Director of Survey and Settlement, the appellant
Committee had preferred a revision before the Board of Revenue which was also dismissed. In the
revision also no argument was raised that the directions issued by the High Court are without
jurisdiction and not binding upon it.
41. The proceedings before the Director of Survey and Settlement and the Board of Revenue as
aforesaid clearly indicate that the appellant Committee had accepted the directions of the High
Court and in pursuant thereof had participated in the proceedings without any hitch and as such
disentitled itself from raising any objection in this regard at such a belated stage for the first time
before this Court.
42. The submission that the direction of the Division Bench of the High Court is patently without
jurisdiction and the issue of jurisdiction can be raised by the party aggrieved at any stage is also not
of substance inasmuch as it would not apply to a case where the party has succumbed to the
jurisdiction by participating in the proceedings thereto taking chance of success and failure. In the
present case, the appellant Committee has not challenged the directions of the Division Bench of the
High Court as without jurisdiction rather consented/accepted to the said directions by participating
in the consequential proceedings. Once the appellant Committee has accepted the order and has
participated in the proceedings, it is estopped in law from questioning the jurisdiction of the court in
issuing such a direction. In such a view, it cannot be said that the appellant Committee has a right to
Salem Muslim Burial Ground ... vs State Of Tamil Nadu And Ors. on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/137942978/
8
raise the question of jurisdiction at this stage.
43. The Principle of Acquiescence has been explained in Black’s Law Dictionary, 9th Edition, as a
person’s tacit or passive acceptance or implied consent to an act. It has been described as a principle
of equity which must be made applicable in a case where the order has been passed and complied
with without raising any objection. Acquiescence is followed by estoppel. A Constitution Bench of
the Supreme Court in Pannalal Binjraj v. Union of India9, six decades ago, had an occasion to
explain the scope of estoppel. It says that once an order is passed against a person and he submits to
the jurisdiction of the said order without raising any objection or complies with it, he cannot be
permitted to challenge the said order, subsequently, when he could not succeed. The conduct of the
person in complying with the order or submitting to the jurisdiction of the order of the Court by
participation, disentitles him to any relief before the Court.
44. It is settled that law does not permit a person to both approbate and reprobate as no party can
accept and reject the same instrument. A person cannot be permitted to say at one time that the
transaction is valid and to obtain advantage under it and on the other hand to say that it is invalid or
incorrect for the purposes of securing some other advantage.
45. The position in the case at hand is similar and identical as in the above referred case and as such
the appellant Committee AIR 1957 SC 397 having participated in the subsequent proceedings
pursuant to the Division Bench decision of the High Court on being unsuccessful therein cannot be
allowed to raise or dispute the validity of such an order.
46. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we do not find any substance in either of the
two points canvassed on behalf of the appellant. The appeals as such lack merit and are dismissed
with no order as to costs.
……………………………….. J.
(V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN) ……………………………….. J.
(PANKAJ MITHAL) New Delhi;
May 18, 2023.
Salem Muslim Burial Ground ... vs State Of Tamil Nadu And Ors. on 18 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/137942978/
9
