Supreme Court of India
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Author: Sanjay Kishan Kaul
Bench: Sanjay Kishan Kaul, Sanjiv Khanna, Abhay S. Oka, Vikram Nath, J.K. Maheshwari
                                                                                  REPORT
                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                   CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
                                       TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1118 OF 2014
                SHILPA SAILESH                                           .....    PETITI
                                                     VERSUS
                VARUN SREENIVASAN                                        .....   RESPOND
                                                              WITH
                                     TRANSFER PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 96 OF 2014
                                    TRANSFER PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 339 OF 2014
                                    TRANSFER PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 382 OF 2014
                                    TRANSFER PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 468 OF 2014
                                                              AND
                                  TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NOS. 1481-1482 OF 2014
                                                            JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
Signature Not Verified Digitally signed by Charanjeet Kaur Date: 2023.05.01 Background.
14:05:29 IST Reason:
The issues before this Constitution Bench, as adumbrated below, arise primarily from the order
dated 12.05.2010 passed in T.P. (C) No. 899 of 2007, Neeti Malviya v. Rakesh Malviya, wherein a
bench of two judges had doubted the view expressed in Anjana Kishore v. Puneet Kishore1 and
Manish Goel v. Rohini Goel2 that this Court, in exercise of the power under Article 142 of the
Constitution of India, cannot reduce or waive the period of six months for moving the second
motion as stipulated in sub-section (2) to Section 13-B of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1956 3. Noticing
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
1
that this Court, some High Courts and even family courts in some States had been dispensing with
or reducing the period of six months for moving the second motion when there was no possibility
whatsoever of the spouses cohabiting, the following question was referred to a three judges’ bench
for a clear ruling and future guidance:
“(I) Whether the period prescribed in sub-section (2) of Section 13-B of the Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955 can be waived or reduced by this Court in exercise of its
jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution?” 1 (2002) 10 SCC 194. This
decision is rendered by a three judges’ bench.
2 (2010) 4 SCC 393.
3 For Short, ‘Hindu Marriage Act’.
However, the question was never decided, since T.P. (C) No. 899 of 2007 was rendered infructuous
as the parties, subsequent to the order of reference, had dissolved their marriage by mutual consent.
2. In T.P. (C) No. 1118 of 2014 4, Shilpa Shailesh v. Varun Sreenivasan, a bench of two judges, vide
the order dated 06.04.20155, issued notice to the Attorney General for India for addressing
arguments on the following issues:
“1. The scope and extent of power of this court under Article 142 of the Constitution
of India insofar as dispensing with the period of notice under Section 13- B of the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 is concerned.
2. The stand of the Government with regard to statutory incorporation of
irretrievable break-down of marriage as one of the conditions for grant of divorce.
3. Any other incidental and ancillary issue that may arise may also be addressed by
the learned Attorney General.”
3. The Attorney General for India, in paragraph 5 of his written submissions, had suggested two
additional questions of law, which read thus:
4 Tagged with T.P. (Crl) No. 96 of 2014, T.P. (Crl) No. 339 of 2014, T.P. (Crl.) No. 382 of 2014, T.P.
(Crl.) No. 468 of 2014 and T.P. (C) No. 1481 – 1482 of 2014. 5 T.P. (C) No. 1118 of 2014 along with
T.P. (Crl.) No. 382 of 2014, T.P. (Crl.) No. 468 of 2014 and T.P. (C) No. 1481 – 1482 of 2014.
“In view of the decisions of the Hon’ble Court in the above cases, the view of the Hon’ble Court that
divorce can be granted on the ground of “irretrievable break-down of marriage” even in the absence
of such ground being contemplated by the Legislature may require consideration by the Constitution
Bench. Similarly, the issue as to whether the period prescribed in sub-section (2) of Section 13-B of
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 can be waived or reduced by this Court in exercise of its jurisdiction
under Article 142 of the Constitution also requires consideration by the Constitution Bench.”
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
2
4. T.P. (C) No. 1118 of 20146 was effectively disposed of vide the order dated 06.05.2015 dissolving
the marriage by grant of divorce by mutual consent with the two judges’ bench exercising
jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution of India. However, in view the conflicting ratio of
the judgments of this Court on the applicability of the power and jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 142 of the Constitution of India, the two judges’ bench of this Court deferred the transfer
petition to remain pending for statistical purposes, and formulated the following questions of law to
be decided by a three judges’ bench:
“4. Notwithstanding the above order passed by us, for the purposes of statistics the
present transfer petitions shall remain pending as we are of the view that an issue of
some importance needs to be addressed by the Court in view of the huge number of
requests for exercise of power under Article 142 of the Constitution that has
confronted this Court consequent to settlement arrived at by and between the
husband and the wife to seek divorce by mutual consent.
6 Along with T.P.(Crl.) No. 382 of 2014, T.P.(Crl.) No. 468 of 2014 and T.P.(C) No. 1481 – 1482 of
2014.
5. The questions are formulated herein below:
1. “What could be the broad parameters for exercise of powers under Article 142 of
the Constitution to dissolve a marriage between the consenting parties without
referring the parties to the Family Court to wait for the mandatory period prescribed
under Section 13- B of the Hindu Marriage Act.
2. Whether the exercise of such jurisdiction under Article 142 should not be made at
all or whether such exercise should be left to be determined in the facts of every
case.”
5. Thereafter, vide the order dated 29.06.2016, another bench of two judges of this Court, on
examining the questions formulated in T.P. (C) No. 1118 of 2014, referred to Article 145(3) of the
Constitution of India, and relying on Pradip Chandra Parija and Others v. Pramod Chandra Patnaik
and Others 7, accepted the submission made by the Attorney General for India to refer the questions
formulated in T.P. (C) No. 1118 of 2014 for consideration of the Constitution Bench8. It was left to
the discretion of the Constitution Bench to decide whether it would be inclined to consider the two
questions of law indicated by the Attorney General for India. 7 (2002) 1 SCC 1.
8 We are not examining and commenting on the ratio expounded in Pradip Chandra Parija & Others
(supra).
6. This Constitution Bench, after hearing the parties, vide the order dated 20.09.2022, had deemed
it appropriate to formulate another question of law, which reads thus:
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
3
“We do believe that another question which would require consideration would be
whether the power under Article 142 of the Constitution of India is inhibited in any
manner in a scenario where there is an irretrievable breakdown of marriage in the
opinion of the Court but one of the parties is not consenting to the terms.”
7. Accordingly, the following substantial questions of law arise for consideration before us:
(i) The scope and ambit of power and jurisdiction of this Court under Article 142(1) of the
Constitution of India;
(ii) Secondly, in view of, and depending upon the findings of this bench on the first question,
whether this Court, while hearing a transfer petition, or in any other proceedings, can exercise
power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India, in view of the settlement between the
parties, and grant a decree of divorce by mutual consent dispensing with the period and the
procedure prescribed under Section 13-B of the Hindu Marriage Act, and also quash and dispose of
other/connected proceedings under the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 20059,
Section 125 of the Code of Criminal 9 For short, ‘Domestic Violence Act’.
Procedure, 197310, or criminal prosecution primarily under Section 498-A and other provisions of
the Indian Penal Code, 186011. If the answer to this question is in the affirmative, in which cases
and under what circumstances should this Court exercise jurisdiction under Article 142(1) of the
Constitution of India is an ancillary issue to be decided; and
(iii) The third issue, which is of considerable importance, is whether this Court can grant divorce in
exercise of power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India when there is complete and
irretrievable breakdown of marriage in spite of the other spouse opposing the prayer.
Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India.
8. Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India reads:
“142. Enforcement of decrees and orders of Supreme Court and orders as to
discovery, etc.— (1) The Supreme Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction may pass
such decree or make such order as is necessary for doing complete justice in any
cause or matter pending before it, and any decree so passed or order so made shall be
enforceable throughout the territory of India in such manner as may be prescribed by
or under any law made by Parliament and, until provision in that behalf is so made,
in such manner as the President may by order prescribe.” 10 For short, ‘Cr.P.C.’.
11 For short, ‘I.P.C.’.
This provision, apparently unique as it does not have any counterpart in most of the major written
constitutions of the world12, has its origin in and is inspired from the age-old concepts of justice,
equity, and good conscience. Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India, which gives wide and
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
4
capacious power to the Supreme Court to do ‘complete justice’ in any ‘cause or matter’ is significant,
as the judgment delivered by this Court ends the litigation between the parties. Given the expansive
amplitude of power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India, the exercise of power must be
legitimate, and clamours for caution, mindful of the danger that arises from adopting an
individualistic approach as to the exercise of the Constitutional power.
9. Interpreting Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India, in M. Siddiq (Dead) Through Legal
Representatives (Ram Janmabhumi Temple Case) v. Mahant Suresh Das and Others13, the
Constitution Bench of this Court has summarised the contours of the power as:
“1023. …The phrase ‘is necessary for doing complete justice’ is of a wide amplitude
and encompasses a power of equity which is employed when the strict application of
the law is inadequate to produce a just outcome. The demands of justice require a
close attention not just to positive law but also to the 12 The Constitutions of
Bangladesh and Nepal have provisions similar to Article 142 of the Constitution of
India, suggesting that they have drawn inspiration from Article 142 of the
Constitution of India.
13 (2020) 1 SCC 1.
silences of positive law to find within its interstices, a solution that is equitable and just. The legal
enterprise is premised on the application of generally worded laws to the specifics of a case before
courts. The complexities of human history and activity inevitably lead to unique contests “such as in
this case, involving religion, history and the law — which the law, by its general nature, is
inadequate to deal with. Even where positive law is clear, the deliberately wide amplitude of the
power under Article 142 empowers a court to pass an order which accords with justice. For justice is
the foundation which brings home the purpose of any legal enterprise and on which the legitimacy
of the rule of law rests. The equitable power under Article 142 of the Constitution brings to fore the
intersection between the general and specific. Courts may find themselves in situations where the
silences of the law need to be infused with meaning or the rigours of its rough edges need to be
softened for law to retain its humane and compassionate face...” Words in the above quotation that
‘the equitable power under Article 142 of the Constitution of India brings to fore the intersection
between the general and specific’ laws, should be read as making a reference to the classification of
equity by Professor C.K. Allen14 in two principle forms: (i) a liberal and humane interpretation of
law in general, so far as that is possible without actual antagonism to the law itself – called equity in
general; and (ii) a liberal and humane modification of the law in exceptional cases, not coming
within the ambit of the general rule – called particular equity.15 The words ‘cause or matter’ in
Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India, which particularise and 14 ‘See – C.K. Allen, Law in the
Making (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1927). 15 See – Ninad Laud, Rationalising “Complete Justice”
under Article 142, (2021) 1 SCC J-30. empower this Court to do ‘complete justice’ in that ‘cause or
matter’, are relatable to particular equity 16. This is the reason that it has been held that Article
142(1) of the Constitution of India turns the maxim ‘equity follows the law’ on its head, as this
Article in the Constitution of India gives legal authority to this Court to give precedence to equity
over law. This power, like all powers under the Constitution of India, must be contained and
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
5
regulated, as it has been held that relief based on equity should not disregard the substantive
mandate of law based on underlying fundamental general and specific issues of public policy.
Subject to this limitation, this Court, while moulding relief, can go to the extent of relaxing the
application of law to the parties or exempting the parties altogether from the rigours of the law, in
view of the particular facts and circumstances of the case. 17 In I. C. Golak Nath and Others v. State
of Punjab and Another 18, K. Subba Rao, CJ., while invoking the doctrine of prospective overruling,
held that the power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India is wide and elastic, and enables
this Court to formulate legal doctrines to meet the ends of justice, and the only limitation thereon is
reason, restraint and injustice. Restraint and deference 16 As this Court interprets the law and
adjudicates specific cases, in many a case, it exercises and applies both equity in general and
particular equity. Also see – distinction between ‘cause’ and ‘matter’.
17 See – State (Through Central Bureau of Investigation) v. Kalyan Singh (Former Chief Minister of
Uttar Pradesh) and Others, (2017) 7 SCC 444.
18 AIR 1967 SC 1643.
are facets of the Rule of Law, and when it comes to the separation of the role and functions of the
legislature, the executive and the judiciary, the exercise of power by this Court to do ‘complete
justice’, being for a ‘cause or matter’, does not interfere with and encroach on the legislature’s power
and function to legislate. Clearly, when this Court exercises jurisdiction conferred by Article 142(1)
of the Constitution of India to do ‘complete justice’ in a ‘cause or matter’, it acts within the four
corners of the Constitution of India. The power specifically bestowed by the Constitution of India on
the apex court of the country is with a purpose, and should be considered as integral to the decision
in a ‘cause or matter’. To do ‘complete justice’ is the utmost consideration and guiding spirit of
Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India.
10. In Union Carbide Corporation and Others v. Union of India and Others19, this Court laid specific
emphasis on the expression ‘cause or matter’ to observe that ‘cause’ means any action or criminal
proceedings, and ‘matter’ means any proceedings in the court and not in a ‘cause’. The words ‘cause
or matter’, when used together, cover almost every kind of proceedings in court, whether civil or
criminal, interlocutory or final, before or after judgment. Having held so, this Court observed thus:
19 (1991) 4 SCC 584.
“83. It is necessary to set at rest certain misconceptions in the arguments touching the scope of the
powers of this Court under Article 142(1) of the Constitution. These issues are matters of serious
public importance. The proposition that a provision in any ordinary law irrespective of the
importance of the public policy on which it is founded, operates to limit the powers of the apex
Court under Article 142(1) is unsound and erroneous. In both Garg as well as Antulay cases the point
was one of violation of constitutional provisions and constitutional rights. The observations as to the
effect of inconsistency with statutory provisions were really unnecessary in those cases as the
decisions in the ultimate analysis turned on the breach of constitutional rights. We agree with Shri
Nariman that the power of the Court under Article 142 insofar as quashing of criminal proceedings
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
6
are concerned is not exhausted by Section 320 or 321 or 482 CrPC or all of them put together. The
power under Article 142 is at an entirely different level and of a different quality. Prohibitions or
limitations or provisions contained in ordinary laws cannot, ipso facto, act as prohibitions or
limitations on the constitutional powers under Article 142. Such prohibitions or limitations in the
statutes might embody and reflect the scheme of a particular law, taking into account the nature and
status of the authority or the court on which conferment of powers — limited in some appropriate
way — is contemplated. The limitations may not necessarily reflect or be based on any fundamental
considerations of public policy. Sri Sorabjee, learned Attorney General, referring to Garg case, said
that limitation on the powers under Article 142 arising from “inconsistency with express statutory
provisions of substantive law” must really mean and be understood as some express prohibition
contained in any substantive statutory law. He suggested that if the expression ‘prohibition’ is read
in place of ‘provision’ that would perhaps convey the appropriate idea. But we think that such
prohibition should also be shown to be based on some underlying fundamental and general issues of
public policy and not merely incidental to a particular statutory scheme or pattern. It will again be
wholly incorrect to say that powers under Article 142 are subject to such express statutory
prohibitions. That would convey the idea that statutory provisions override a constitutional
provision. Perhaps, the proper way of expressing the idea is that in exercising powers under Article
142 and in assessing the needs of “complete justice” of a cause or matter, the apex Court will take
note of the express prohibitions in any substantive statutory provision based on some fundamental
principles of public policy and regulate the exercise of its power and discretion accordingly. The
proposition does not relate to the powers of the Court under Article 142, but only to what is or is not
‘complete justice’ of a cause or matter and in the ultimate analysis of the propriety of the exercise of
the power. No question of lack of jurisdiction or of nullity can arise.”
11. Whether this ratio is in conflict with the earlier decisions 20 of this Court, including Prem Chand
Garg and Another v. The Excise Commissioner, U.P. and Others21, wherein five judges of the
Constitution Bench had held that this power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India cannot
be employed to make an order plainly inconsistent with the express statutory provision or
substantive law, much less inconsistent with any Constitutional provisions, was examined by
another five judges’ bench of this Court in Supreme Court Bar Association v. Union of India and
Another22, to observe that there was no conflict of ratios as elucidated in Union Carbide
Corporation (supra) and other 20 A.R. Antulay v. R.S. Nayak and Another, (1988) 2 SCC 602; Delhi
Judicial Service Association, Tis Hazari Court, Delhi v. State of Gujarat and Others, (1991) 4 SCC
406; and Mohammed Anis v. Union of India and Others, 1994 Suppl. (1) SCC 145. In Mohammed
Anis , this Court, while elucidating and unfolding the aspect of public policy and when it would
operate to limit the power of the Supreme Court, observes that given the nature of power conferred
by the Constitution of India on this Court under Article 142 of the Constitution of India, which is of a
different quality and level, prohibitions or limitations on provisions contained in ordinary laws
cannot ipso facto act as prohibitions or limitations on the Constitutional power under Article 142 of
the Constitution of India. The decision observes that mere reference to a larger bench does not
prohibit this Court in a given case from its exercise of powers conferred under Article 142 of the
Constitution of India. 21 AIR 1963 SC 996.
22 (1998) 4 SCC 409.
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
7
cases. It is one thing to state that prohibitions or limitations cannot come in the way of the exercise
of jurisdiction under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India to do ‘complete justice’ between the
parties in the pending ‘cause or matter’ arising out of that statute, but quite a different thing to say
that, while exercising jurisdiction under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India, this Court can
altogether ignore the substantive provisions of the statute dealing with the subject and pass orders
concerning an issue which can be settled only through a mechanism prescribed in the statute. 23
These observations were in the context of the powers conferred on the State Bar Councils under the
Advocates Act, 1961, which, at the first instance, is empowered to decide whether an advocate is
guilty of professional misconduct depending on the gravity and nature of his contumacious conduct.
This Court, in Supreme Court Bar Association (supra), has highlighted that the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court in contempt, and the jurisdiction of the State Bar Councils under the Advocates Act,
1961 are separate and distinct, and are exercisable by following separate and distinct procedures.
The power to punish for contempt of court vests exclusively with the courts, whereas the power to
punish an advocate for professional misconduct has been vested with the 23 There is also distinction
between existence of power, and proper exercise of power in a given case, which aspect we have
subsequently examined in paragraph 20. concerned State Bar Council and the Bar Council of India.
In this context, we would like to quote the following passages from Supreme Court Bar Association
(supra):
“47. The plenary powers of this Court under Article 142 of the Constitution are
inherent in the Court and are complementary to those powers which are specifically
conferred on the Court by various statutes though are not limited by those statutes.
These powers also exist independent of the statutes with a view to do complete justice
between the parties. These powers are of very wide amplitude and are in the nature of
supplementary powers. This power exists as a separate and independent basis of
jurisdiction apart from the statutes. It stands upon the foundation and the basis for
its exercise may be put on a different and perhaps even wider footing, to prevent
injustice in the process of litigation and to do complete justice between the parties.
This plenary jurisdiction is, thus, the residual source of power which this Court may
draw upon as necessary whenever it is just and equitable to do so and in particular to
ensure the observance of the due process of law, to do complete justice between the
parties, while administering justice according to law.
There is no doubt that it is an indispensable adjunct to all other powers and is free from the restraint
of jurisdiction and operates as a valuable weapon in the hands of the Court to prevent “clogging or
obstruction of the stream of justice”. It, however, needs to be remembered that the powers conferred
on the Court by Article 142 being curative in nature cannot be construed as powers which authorise
the Court to ignore the substantive rights of a litigant while dealing with a cause pending before it.
This power cannot be used to “supplant” substantive law applicable to the case or cause under
consideration of the Court. Article 142, even with the width of its amplitude, cannot be used to build
a new edifice where none existed earlier, by ignoring express statutory provisions dealing with a
subject and thereby to achieve something indirectly which cannot be achieved directly. Punishing a
contemner advocate, while dealing with a contempt of court case by suspending his licence to
practice, a power otherwise statutorily available only to the Bar Council of India, on the ground that
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
8
the contemner is also an advocate, is, therefore, not permissible in exercise of the jurisdiction under
Article 142. The construction of Article 142 must be functionally informed by the salutary purposes
of the article, viz., to do complete justice between the parties. It cannot be otherwise. As already
noticed in a case of contempt of court, the contemner and the court cannot be said to be litigating
parties.
48. The Supreme Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 142 has the power to make such
order as is necessary for doing complete justice “between the parties in any cause or matter pending
before it”. The very nature of the power must lead the Court to set limits for itself within which to
exercise those powers and ordinarily it cannot disregard a statutory provision governing a subject,
except perhaps to balance the equities between the conflicting claims of the litigating parties by
“ironing out the creases” in a cause or matter before it. Indeed this Court is not a court of restricted
jurisdiction of only dispute-settling. It is well recognised and established that this Court has always
been a law-maker and its role travels beyond merely dispute-settling. It is a “problem-solver in the
nebulous areas” but the substantive statutory provisions dealing with the subject-matter of a given
case cannot be altogether ignored by this Court, while making an order under Article 142. Indeed,
these constitutional powers cannot, in any way, be controlled by any statutory provisions but at the
same time these powers are not meant to be exercised when their exercise may come directly in
conflict with what has been expressly provided for in a statute dealing expressly with the subject.”
12. We must, at this stage, as noticed in Union Carbide Corporation (supra), draw a distinction
between the Constitutional power exercisable by this Court under Article 142(1) of the Constitution
of India, and the inherent power of the civil court recognised by Section 151 of the C.P.C. and the
inherent power of the High Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C., which provisions empower the civil
court in civil cases and the High Court in criminal cases to pass such orders as may be necessary to
meet the ‘ends of justice’ or to prevent abuse of the process of court. The expression ‘ends of justice’
refers to the best interest of the public within the four corners of the law, albeit the courts are not
empowered to act contrary to the procedure on the particular aspect of law provided in the C.P.C.
and the Cr.P.C. Where the C.P.C. and the Cr.P.C. are silent, the civil court or the High Court, 24
respectively, can pass orders in the interest of the public, for the simple reason that no legislation is
capable of contemplating all possible circumstances that may arise in future litigation and
consequently provide a procedure for them 25. Thus, the C.P.C. and the Cr.P.C. should not be read
as to limit or otherwise affect the inherent power of the civil court and the High Court, respectively,
to make such order as is necessary for the ‘ends of justice’, or to prevent abuse of the process of the
court. 26 The Constitutional power conferred by Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India on 24 For
Section 151 C.P.C. see – Jet Ply Wood (P.) Ltd. and Another v. Madhukar Nowlakha and Others,
(2006) 3 SCC 699; and Bhagat Singh Bugga v. Dewan Jagbir Sawhney, 1941 SCC OnLine Cal 247.
For Section 482 Cr.P.C. see – Popular Muthiah v. State Represented By Inspector Of Police, (2006)
7 SCC 296; and Dinesh Dutt Joshi v. State of Rajasthan and Another, (2001) 8 SCC 570. 25 This
statement on legislation is equally true, if not truer, for exercise of power by this Court under Article
142(1) of the Constitution of India.
26 Earlier judgments of different High Courts in Bhim Singh v. Kan Singh, 2003 SCC OnLine Raj
326; Nagen Kundu v. Emperor, 1934 SCC OnLine Cal 12; and Chhail Das v. State of Haryana, 1974
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
9
SCC OnLine P&H 246, relating to the Cr.P.C., hold that the Cr.P.C. is deemed to be exhaustive when
covered by a provision, but where a case arises which demands exercise of discretion, which is not
within the provisions that the Cr.P.C. specifically provides, it would be reasonable to say that the
court has power to make such order as the ‘ends of justice’ require. Every criminal court, including
the court of a Metropolitan Magistrate, has this power, notwithstanding the specific power conferred
under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. on the High Court. this Court is not a replication of the inherent
power vested with the civil court under the C.P.C., and the High Court under the Cr.P.C.
13. Given the aforesaid background and judgments of this Court, the plenary and conscientious
power conferred on this Court under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India, seemingly
unhindered, is tempered or bounded by restraint, which must be exercised based on fundamental
considerations of general and specific public policy. Fundamental general conditions of public policy
refer to the fundamental rights, secularism, federalism, and other basic features of the Constitution
of India. Specific public policy should be understood as some express pre-eminent prohibition in
any substantive law, and not stipulations and requirements to a particular statutory scheme. It
should not contravene a fundamental and non-derogable principle at the core of the statute. Even in
the strictest sense 27, it was never doubted or 27 Some jurists have opined that the judgments on the
powers of this Court under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India can be divided into three
phases. The first phase till late 1980s is reflected in the judgments of Prem Chand Garg (supra) and
A.R. Antulay (supra), which inter alia held that the directions should not be repugnant to and in
violation of specific statutory provision and is limited to deviation from the rules of procedure.
Further, the direction must not infringe the Fundamental Rights of the individual, which
proposition has never been doubted and holds good in phase two and three. The second phase has
its foundation in the ratio of the judgment of the 11-Judge Constitution Bench of this Court in I. C.
Golak Nath (supra), dealing with the doctrine of prospective overruling, which held that Articles 32,
141 and 142 are couched in such wide and elastic terms as to enable this Court to formulate legal
doctrines to meet the ends of justice, the only limitation thereon being reason, restraint and
injustice. In Delhi Judicial Service Association (supra), this Court observes that any prohibition or
restriction contained in ordinary laws cannot act as a limitation on the constitutional power of this
Court to issue any order or direction to do ‘complete justice’ in any ‘cause’ or ‘matter’. Finally, the
moderated approach has its origin in Union Carbide Corporation (supra), which holds that this
Court, in exercising powers under Article 142 and in assessing the needs of ‘complete justice’ of a
‘cause’ or ‘matter’, will take note of the express prohibitions in any substantive statutory provision
based on some fundamental principles of public policy and regulate the exercise of its power and
discretion accordingly. The judgment of Supreme Court Bar Association (supra), applies cautious
and debated that this Court is empowered under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India to do
‘complete justice’ without being bound by the relevant provisions of procedure, if it is satisfied that
the departure from the said procedure is necessary to do ‘complete justice’ between the parties.28
Difference between procedural and substantive law in jurisprudential terms is contentious, albeit
not necessary to be examined in depth in the present decision 29, as in terms of the dictum
enunciated by this Court in Union Carbide Corporation (supra) and Supreme Court Bar Association
(supra), exercise of power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India to do ‘complete justice’ in
a ‘cause or matter’ is prohibited only when the exercise is to pass an order which is plainly and
expressly barred by statutory provisions of substantive law based on fundamental considerations of
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
10
general or specific public policy. As explained in Supreme Court Bar Association (supra), the
exercise of power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India being curative in nature, this
Court would not ordinarily pass an balanced approach, to hold that Article 142 being curative in
nature and a constitutional power cannot be controlled by any statutory provision, but this power is
not meant to be exercised ignoring the statutory provisions or directly in conflict with what is
expressly provided in the statute. At the same-time, it observes, that this Court will not ordinarily
discard a statutory provision governing the subject, except perhaps to balance the equities between
the conflicting claims of the parties to “iron out the creases” in a ‘cause or matter’ before it. [See –
Rajat Pradhan, Ironing out the Creases: Re- examining the Contours of Invoking Article 142(1) of
the Constitution, (2011) 6 NSLR 1; Ninad Laud, Rationalising “Complete Justice” under Article 142,
(2021) 1 SCC J-30; and Virendra Kumar, Notes and Comments: Judicial Legislation Under Article
142 of the Constitution: A Pragmatic Prompt for Proper Legislation by Parliament, 54 JILI (2012)
364]. As observed by us, the ratio as expounded in Union Carbide Corporation (supra) holds good
and applies. 28 See – Prem Chand Garg (supra), paragraph 13.
29 However, this aspect has been, to some extent, examined in paragraphs 16 to 22 and 30 infra.
order ignoring or disregarding a statutory provision governing the subject, except to balance the
equities between conflicting claims of the litigating parties by ironing out creases in a ‘cause or
matter’ before it. In this sense, this Court is not a forum of restricted jurisdiction when it decides
and settles the dispute in a ‘cause or matter’. While this Court cannot supplant the substantive law
by building a new edifice where none existed earlier, or by ignoring express substantive statutory
law provisions, it is a problem-solver in the nebulous areas. As long as ‘complete justice’ required by
the ‘cause or matter’ is achieved without violating fundamental principles of general or specific
public policy, the exercise of the power and discretion under Article 142(1) is valid and as per the
Constitution of India. This is the reason why the power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of
India is undefined and uncatalogued, so as to ensure elasticity to mould relief to suit a given
situation. The fact that the power is conferred only on this Court is an assurance that it will be used
with due restraint and circumspection.30 Hindu marriage and divorce under the Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955.
14. Hindu marriage is traditionally considered to be a sacred union; a devout relationship that lasts
till eternity. The Hindu Marriage Act 30 See – Delhi Development Authority v. Skipper Construction
Co. (P) Ltd. And Another, (1996) 4 SCC 622.
provides the right to approach the court for dissolution of Hindu marriage by grant of a decree of
divorce on the grounds mentioned in Section 13 thereof. The provisions of the Hindu Marriage Act
have undergone considerable changes over a period of time. Section 13(1)(i-a) was enacted by the
Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 197631 to provide for divorce in cases of cruelty. Section 13-B of
the Hindu Marriage Act was introduced for providing divorce by mutual consent. Explanation was
added to Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, which relates to restitution of conjugal rights, stating
that where a question of whether there has been reasonable excuse for withdrawal from society
arises, the burden of proving reasonable excuse shall be on the person who has so withdrawn from
the society. The effect of the said amendment, as noticed below, partially dilutes the rigours of sub-
section (1)(a) to Section 23 of the Hindu Marriage Act, which stipulates that the court, while
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
11
examining whether any ground for granting relief exists, should be satisfied that the petitioner is
not, in any way, taking advantage of his/her own wrong or disability for the purpose of such relief.
15. Section 13-B of the Hindu Marriage Act reads as under:
“13-B. Divorce by mutual consent.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act a petition for dissolution
of 31 Act 68 of 1976, w.e.f. 27.05.1976.
marriage by a decree of divorce may be presented to the district court by both the parties to a
marriage together, whether such marriage was solemnized before or after the commencement of the
Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976 (68 of 1976), on the ground that they have been living
separately for a period of one year or more, that they have not been able to live together and that
they have mutually agreed that the marriage should be dissolved.
(2) On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than six months after the date of the
presentation of the petition referred to in sub-section (1) and not later than eighteen months after
the said date, if the petition is not withdrawn in the meantime, the court shall, on being satisfied,
after hearing the parties and after making such inquiry as it thinks fit, that a marriage has been
solemnized and that the averments in the petition are true, pass a decree of divorce declaring the
marriage to be dissolved with effect from the date of the decree.”
16. Section 13-B(1) of the Hindu Marriage Act states that a decree of divorce may be granted on a
joint petition by the parties on fulfilment of the following conditions:
(a) the parties have been living separately for a period of one year or more before presentation of the
petition;
(b) they have not been able to live together; and
(c) they have mutually agreed that the marriage should be dissolved.
Sub-section (2) to Section 13-B of the Hindu Marriage Act provides that after the first motion is
passed, the couple/parties would have to move to the court with the second motion, if the petition is
not withdrawn in the meanwhile, after six months and not later than eighteen months of the first
motion. No action can be taken by the parties before the lapse of six months since the first motion.
When the second motion is filed, the court is to make an inquiry, and on satisfaction that the
averments made in the petition are true, a decree of divorce is granted. Clearly, the legislative intent
behind incorporating sub-section (2) to Section 13-B of the Hindu Marriage Act is that the
couple/party must have time to introspect and consider the decision to separate before the second
motion is moved. However, there are cases of exceptional hardship, where after some years of
acrimonious litigation and prolonged suffering, the parties, with a view to have a fresh start, jointly
pray to the court to dissolve the marriage, and seek waiver of the need to move the second motion.
On account of irreconcilable differences, allegations and aspersions made against each other and the
family members, and in some cases multiple litigations including criminal cases, continuation of the
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
12
marital relationship is an impossibility. The divorce is inevitable, and the cooling off period of six
months, if at all, breeds misery and pain, without any gain and benefit. These are cases where the
object and purpose behind sub-section (2) to Section 13-B of the Hindu Marriage Act to safeguard
against hurried and hasty decisions are not in issue and question, and the procedural requirement to
move the court with the second motion after a gap of six months acts as an impediment in the
settlement. At times, payment of alimony and permanent lump-sum maintenance gets delayed,
while anxiety and suspicion remain. Here, the procedure should give way to a larger public and
personal interest of the parties in ending the litigation(s), and the pain and sorrow effected, by
passing a formal decree of divorce, as de-facto the marriage had ended much earlier.
17. Analysing the provisions of sub-section (2) to Section 13-B of the Hindu Marriage Act, this Court
in Amardeep Singh v. Harveen Kaur32 went into the question of whether the cooling off period of
six months is mandatory or discretionary. It was held that the cooling off period can be waived by
the court where the proceedings have remained pending for long in the courts, these being cases of
exceptional situations. It was held thus:
“14. The learned Amicus Curiae submitted that waiting period enshrined under
Section 13-B(2) of the Act is directory and can be waived by the court where
proceedings are pending, in exceptional situations.
This view is supported by the judgments of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in K. Omprakash v. K.
Nalini, Karnataka High Court in Roopa Reddy v. Prabhakar Reddy, Delhi High Court in Dhanjit
Vadra v. Beena Vadra and Madhya Pradesh High Court in Dineshkumar Shukla v. Neeta. Contrary
view has been taken by the Kerala High Court in M. Krishna Preetha 32 (2017) 8 SCC 746.
v. Jayan Moorkkanatt. It was submitted that Section 13-B(1) relates to jurisdiction of the court and
the petition is maintainable only if the parties are living separately for a period of one year or more
and if they have not been able to live together and have agreed that the marriage be dissolved.
Section 13-B(2) is procedural. He submitted that the discretion to waive the period is a guided
discretion by consideration of interest of justice where there is no chance of reconciliation and
parties were already separated for a longer period or contesting proceedings for a period longer than
the period mentioned in Section 13-B(2). Thus, the court should consider the questions:
(i) How long parties have been married?
(ii) How long litigation is pending?
(iii) How long they have been staying apart?
(iv) Are there any other proceedings between the parties?
(v) Have the parties attended mediation/ conciliation?
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
13
(vi) Have the parties arrived at genuine settlement which takes care of alimony, custody of child or
any other pending issues between the parties?
xx xx xx
19. Applying the above to the present situation, we are of the view that where the court dealing with
a matter is satisfied that a case is made out to waive the statutory period under Section 13-B(2), it
can do so after considering the following:
(i) the statutory period of six months specified in Section 13-B(2), in addition to the statutory period
of one year under Section 13-B(1) of separation of parties is already over before the first motion
itself;
(ii) all efforts for mediation/conciliation including efforts in terms of Order 32-A Rule 3
CPC/Section 23(2) of the Act/Section 9 of the Family Courts Act to reunite the parties have failed
and there is no likelihood of success in that direction by any further efforts;
(iii) the parties have genuinely settled their differences including alimony, custody of child or any
other pending issues between the parties;
(iv) the waiting period will only prolong their agony. The waiver application can be filed one week
after the first motion giving reasons for the prayer for waiver. If the above conditions are satisfied,
the waiver of the waiting period for the second motion will be in the discretion of the court
concerned.” The time gap is meant to enable the parties to cogitate, analyse and take a deliberated
decision. The object of the cooling off period is not to stretch the already disintegrated marriage, or
to prolong the agony and misery of the parties when there are no chances of the marriage working
out. Therefore, once every effort has been made to salvage the marriage and there remains no
possibility of reunion and cohabitation, the court is not powerless in enabling the parties to avail a
better option, which is to grant divorce. The waiver is not to be given on mere asking, but on the
court being satisfied beyond doubt that the marriage has shattered beyond repair. The judgment in
Amardeep Singh (supra) refers to several questions that the court would ask before passing an order
one way or the other. However, this judgment proceeds on the interpretation of Section 13-B(2) of
the Hindu Marriage Act, and does not examine whether this Court can take on record a settlement
agreement and grant divorce by mutual consent under Section 13-B of the Hindu Marriage Act in
exercise of the power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India.
18. We must acknowledge that this Court has very often entertained applications/prayers for divorce
by mutual consent under Section 13-B of the Hindu Marriage Act, and passed a decree of divorce
without relegating or asking the parties to move a joint motion before the trial court. In such cases,
other pending proceedings between the parties, civil and criminal, are appropriately dealt with in
terms of the settlement, and are decreed, quashed or closed accordingly. This situation arises when
proceedings are pending in this Court against an interim or a final order passed in a judicial
proceeding, or on a transfer petition being filed before this Court. The parties may mutually agree to
dissolve the marriage, albeit on many occasions they enter into settlements, often through
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
14
mediation or on being prompted by the Court. In matrimonial matters, settlement, and not
litigation, is the preferable mode of dispute resolution.33
19. Exercise of jurisdiction under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India by this Court in such
cases is clearly permissible to do ‘complete justice’ to a ‘cause or matter’. We should accept that this
Court can pass an order or decree which a family court, trial 33 See – Section 89 of the C.P.C. and
Section 9 of the Family Courts Act, 1984. court or High Court can pass. As per Article 142(1) of the
Constitution of India, a decree passed or an order made by this Court is executable throughout the
territory of India. 34 Power of this Court under Articles 136 and 142(1) of the Constitution of India
will certainly embrace and enswathe this power to do ‘complete justice’, even when the main
case/proceeding is pending before the family court, the trial court or another judicial forum. A
question or issue of lack of subject-matter jurisdiction does not arise. Settlements in matrimonial
matters invariably end multiple legal proceedings, including criminal proceedings in different courts
and at diverse locations. Necessarily, in such cases, the parties have to move separate applications in
multiple courts, including the jurisdictional High Court, for appropriate relief and closure, and
disposal and/or dismissal of cases. This puts burden on the courts in the form of listing, paper work,
compliance with formalities, verification etc. Parallelly, parties have to bear the cost, appear before
several forums/courts and the final orders get delayed causing anxiety and apprehension. In this
sense, when this Court exercises the power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India, it
assists and aids the cause of justice. 34 See – the Supreme Court (Decrees and Orders) Enforcement
Order, 1954 (C.O.47).
20. However, there is a difference between existence of a power, and exercise of that power in a
given case. Existence of power is generally a matter of law, whereas exercise of power is a mixed
question of law and facts. Even when the power to pass a decree of divorce by mutual consent exists
and can be exercised by this Court under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India, when and in
which of the cases the power should be exercised to do ‘complete justice’ in a ‘cause or matter’ is an
issue that has to be determined independent of existence of the power. This discretion has to be
exercised on the basis of the factual matrix in the particular case, evaluated on objective criteria and
factors, without ignoring the objective of the statutory provisions. In Amit Kumar v. Suman Beniwal
35, this Court has held that reading of sub-sections (1) and (2) to Section 13-B of the Hindu
Marriage Act envisages a total waiting period/gap of one and a half years from the date of separation
for the grant of decree of divorce by mutual consent. Once the condition for waiting period/gap of
one and a half year from the date of separation is fulfilled, it can be safely said that the parties had
time to ponder, reflect and take a conscious decision on whether they should really put the marriage
to end for all times to come. This period of separation prevents impulsive and heedless dissolution
of marriage, allows tempers to cool down, 35 (2021) SCC Online SC 1270.
anger to dissipate, and gives the spouses time to forgive and forget. At the same time, when there is
complete separation over a long period and the parties have moved apart and have mutually agreed
to separate, it would be incoherent to perpetuate the litigation by asking the parties to move the trial
court. This Court in Amit Kumar (supra) has observed that, in addition to referring to the six
factors/questions in Amardeep Singh (supra), this Court should ascertain whether the parties have
freely, on their own accord, and without any coercion or pressure arrived at a genuine settlement
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
15
which took care of the alimony, if any, maintenance and custody of children, etc.
21. In our opinion, Section 13-B of the Hindu Marriage Act does not impose any fetters on the
powers of this Court to grant a decree of divorce by mutual consent on a joint application, when the
substantive conditions of the Section are fulfilled and the Court, after referring to the factors
mentioned above, is convinced and of the opinion that the decree of divorce should be granted.
22. The legislature and the courts treat matrimonial litigations as a special, if not a unique, category.
Public policy underlying the legislations dealing with family and matrimonial matters is to
encourage mutual settlement, as is clearly stated in Section 89 of the C.P.C., Section 23(2) of the
Hindu Marriage Act, and Section 9 of the Family Courts Act, 1984. Given that there are multiple
legislations governing different aspects, even if the cause of dispute is identical or similar, most
matrimonial disputes lead to a miscellany of cases including criminal cases, at times genuine, and
on other occasions initiated because of indignation, hurt, anger or even misguided advice to teach a
lesson. The multiplicity of litigations can restrict and block solutions, as a settlement has to be
holistic and comprehensive, given that the objective and purpose is to enable the parties to cohabit
and live together, or if they decide to part ways, to have a new beginning and settle down to live
peacefully. Therefore, in B.S. Joshi and Others v. State of Haryana and Another36, this Court,
notwithstanding that Section 320 of the Cr.P.C. does not permit compounding of an offence under
Section 498A of the I.P.C., has held that the High Court, exercising the power under Section 482 of
the Cr.P.C., may quash prosecutions even in non-compoundable offences when the ends of justice so
require. This view has been affirmed by the three judges’ bench in Gian Singh v. State of Punjab and
Another37 and reiterated by another three judges’ bench in Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.
Babita Raghuvanshi and 36 (2003) 4 SCC 675.
37 (2012) 10 SCC 303.
Another38. The reason is that the courts must not encourage matrimonial litigation, and
prolongation of such litigation is detrimental to both the parties who lose their young age in chasing
multiple litigations. Thus, adopting a hyper-technical view can be counter-productive as pendency
itself causes pain, suffering and harassment and, consequently, it is the duty of the court to ensure
that matrimonial matters are amicably resolved, thereby bringing the agony, affliction, and torment
to an end. In this regard, the courts only have to enquire and ensure that the settlement between the
parties is achieved without pressure, force, coercion, fraud, misrepresentation, or undue influence,
and that the consent is indeed sought by free will and choice, and the autonomy of the parties is not
compromised. The latter two decisions in Gian Singh (supra) and Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others
(supra) observe that the inherent power on the High Court under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. is wide
and can be used/wielded to quash criminal proceedings to secure the ends of justice and prevent
abuse of the process of the court, albeit it has to be exercised sparingly, carefully, and with caution.
This Court, in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Laxmi Narayan and Others39, has set out guidelines as to
when the High Court may exercise jurisdiction 38 (2013) 4 SCC 58.
39 (2019) 5 SCC 688.
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
16
under the inherent powers conferred under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. for quashing
non-compoundable offences in terms of Section 320 of the Cr.P.C. In view of the above legal
position and discussion, this Court, on the basis of settlement between the parties, while passing a
decree of divorce by mutual consent, can set aside and quash other proceedings and orders,
including criminal cases and First Information Report(s), provided the conditions, as specified in
the aforementioned judgments, are satisfied.
Grant of divorce on the ground of irretrievable breakdown of marriage in exercise of jurisdiction and
power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India.
23. This brings us to the last question of whether this Court, in exercise of power under Article
142(1) of the Constitution of India, can grant a decree of divorce when, upon the prayer of one of the
spouses, it is satisfied that there is complete and irretrievable breakdown of marriage,
notwithstanding the opposition to such prayer by the other spouse?
24. Section 13(1)(i-a) of the Hindu Marriage Act, enacted by Act No. 68 of 1976 with effect from 25th
May 1976, reads thus:
“13 Divorce.- (1) Any marriage solemnized, whether before or after the
commencement of this Act, may, on a petition presented by either the husband or the
wife, be dissolved by a decree of divorce on the ground that the other party— xx xx xx
(i-a) has, after the solemnization of the marriage, treated the petitioner with cruelty;
or xx xx xx"
This provision often has to be read with clause (a) to Section 23(1) of the Hindu Marriage Act, the
substantive portion of which was enacted as a part of the main enactment vide Act No. 25 of 1955,
and reads:
“23. Decree in proceedings. — (1) In any proceeding under this Act, whether defended
or not, if the court is satisfied that—
(a) any of the grounds for granting relief exists and the petitioner 40[except in cases
where the relief is sought by him on the ground specified in sub-clause (a), sub-
clause (b) or sub-clause (c) of clause (ii) of Section 5] is not in anyway taking advantage of his or her
own wrong or disability for the purpose of such relief, and xx xx xx” The legal effect of Section
13(1)(i-a) read with Section 23 (1)
(a) of the Hindu Marriage Act, it has been interpreted, invokes the ‘fault theory’, an aspect which we
shall subsequently examine. First, we would like to delineate the meaning of the term ‘cruelty’,
which expression has not been defined in the Hindu Marriage Act. 40 The bracketed portion was
enacted vide Act No. 68 of 1976 with effect from 27.05.1976.
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
17
25. In N.G. Dastane v. S. Dastane41, as early as 1975, a three judges’ bench of this Court, after
referring to the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1972, held that the fact is said to be
established if it is proved by a preponderance of probabilities, that is, the court believes it to exist or
considers its existence so probable that a prudent man ought to, under the circumstances of a
particular case, act upon the supposition that it exists. Often, the belief regarding the existence of a
fact is founded on balance of probabilities, that is, the court is to weigh the various probabilities to
discern the preponderance in favour of the existence of a particular fact. Holding that the
proceedings under the Hindu Marriage Act are civil proceedings, and referring to the provisions of
Section 23 of the Hindu Marriage Act, it was held that the word ‘satisfied’ must connote satisfaction
on ‘preponderance of probabilities’ and not ‘beyond a reasonable doubt’. On the meaning of ‘cruelty’
as a ground for dissolution of marriage, reference was made to the High Court’s reliance on D.
Tolstoy’s passage in The Law and Practice of Divorce and Matrimonial Causes. Therein, ‘cruelty’ has
been defined as wilful and unjustified conduct of such character as to cause danger to life, limb or
health, bodily or mentally, or as to give rise to a reasonable apprehension of such danger. However,
this Court felt that D. 41 (1975) 2 SCC 326.
Tolstoy’s passage, which cites Horton v. Horton42, is not enough to show that the spouses find life
together impossible even if there results injury to health. Accordingly, this Court elucidated that if
the danger to health arises merely from the fact that the spouses find it impossible to live together
and one of the parties is indifferent towards the other, the charge of cruelty may perhaps fail.
However, harm or injury to health, reputation, the working-career or the like, would be important
considerations in determining whether the conduct of the defending spouse amounts to cruelty. The
petitioner has to show that the respondent has treated them with cruelty so as to cause reasonable
apprehension in their mind that it will be harmful or injurious to live with the contesting spouse. In
today’s context, two observations, while a court enquires into the charge of cruelty, are of some
significance. First, the court should not philosophise on the modalities of married life. Secondly,
whether the charge is proved or not cannot be decided by applying the principle of whether a
reasonable man situated similarly will behave in a similar manner. What may be cruel to one may
not matter to another, and what may not be cruel to an individual under one set of circumstances
may be extreme cruelty under another set of circumstances. Cruelty is subjective, that is, it is person,
background, and circumstance specific. 42 [1940] P.187.
26. V. Bhagat v. D. Bhagat43, which was pronounced in 1993, 18 years after the decision in N.G.
Dastane (supra), gives a life-like expansion to the term ‘cruelty’. This case was between a husband
who was practicing as an Advocate, aged about 55 years, and the wife, who was the Vice President in
a public sector undertaking, aged about 50 years, having two adult children – a doctor by profession
and an MBA degree holder working abroad, respectively. Allegations of an adulterous course of life,
lack of mental equilibrium and pathologically suspicious character were made against each other.
This Court noticed that the divorce petition had remained pending for more than eight years, and in
spite of the directions given by this Court, not much progress had been made. It was highlighted that
cruelty contemplated under Section 13(1)(i-a) of the Hindu Marriage Act is both mental and
physical, albeit a comprehensive definition of what constitutes cruelty would be most difficult. Much
depends upon the knowledge and intention of the defending spouse, the nature of their conduct, the
character and physical or mental weakness of the spouses, etc. The sum total of the reprehensible
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
18
conduct or departure from normal standards of conjugal kindness that causes injury to health, or an
apprehension of it, constitutes cruelty. But these 43 (1994) 1 SCC 337.
factors must take into account the temperament and all other specific circumstances in order to
decide that the conduct complained of is such that a petitioner should not be called to endure it. It
was further elaborated that cruelty, mental or physical, may be both intentional or unintentional.
Matrimonial obligations and responsibilities vary in degrees. They differ in each household and to
each person, and the cruelty alleged depends upon the nature of life the parties are accustomed to,
or their social and economic conditions. They may also depend upon the culture and human values
to which the spouses assign significance. There may be instances of cruelty by unintentional but
inexcusable conduct of the other spouse. Thus, there is a distinction between intention to commit
cruelty and the actual act of cruelty, as absence of intention may not, in a given case, make any
difference if the act complained of is otherwise regarded as cruel. Deliberate and wilful intention,
therefore, may not matter. Paragraph 16 of the judgment in V. Bhagat (supra) reads as under:
“16. Mental cruelty in Section 13(1)(i-a) can broadly be defined as that conduct which
inflicts upon the other party such mental pain and suffering as would make it not
possible for that party to live with the other. In other words, mental cruelty must be
of such a nature that the parties cannot reasonably be expected to live together. The
situation must be such that the wronged party cannot reasonably be asked to put up
with such conduct and continue to live with the other party. It is not necessary to
prove that the mental cruelty is such as to cause injury to the health of the petitioner.
While arriving at such conclusion, regard must be had to the social status,
educational level of the parties, the society they move in, the possibility or otherwise
of the parties ever living together in case they are already living apart and all other
relevant facts and circumstances which it is neither possible nor desirable to set out
exhaustively. What is cruelty in one case may not amount to cruelty in another case.
It is a matter to be determined in each case having regard to the facts and
circumstances of that case. If it is a case of accusations and allegations, regard must
also be had to the context in which they were made.” The Division Bench of this Court
in V. Bhagat (supra) has also observed that while irretrievable breakdown of marriage
is not a ground for divorce, specific circumstances may have to be borne in mind
while ascertaining the type of cruelty contemplated by Section 13(1)(i-a) of the Hindu
Marriage Act. These observations, with which we agree, give a different connotation
to the ‘fault theory’, as to dilute the strict legal understanding of the term ‘cruelty’ for
the purpose of Section 13(1)(i-a) of the Hindu Marriage Act. This interpretation is
situation, case and person specific.
27. In Ashok Hurra v. Rupa Bipin Zaveri44, decided in 1997, this Court was confronted with a
situation where the marriage had fallen apart and the couple had separated in 1983. They did not
have any specific issue, but difference of opinion had cropped up 44 (1997) 4 SCC 226.
between the parties. Further, even after residing separately for thirteen years, the parties were not
agreeable to a divorce by mutual consent. This was in spite of the fact that the husband had
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
19
remarried and had a child. This Court was of the view that considering the cumulative effect of
various factors and the marriage being dead, no useful purpose, both emotionally and practically,
would be served in postponing the inevitability and prolonging the agony of the parties or their
marriage and, therefore, the curtain should be rung down. This Court, therefore, exercised the
power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India to grant a decree of divorce, though the
conduct of the husband, it was observed, was blameworthy as he had remarried and conceived a
child during the pendency of the proceedings. This decree of divorce by mutual consent was made
conditional on payment of Rs.10,00,000/- by the husband to the wife. Only on payment or deposit
of the amount in the Court, all proceedings, including those under Section 494 of the I.P.C., were to
stand terminated.
28. In Naveen Kohli v. Neelu Kohli45, a three judges’ bench of this Court referred to the opinion of
Lord Denning, L.J. in Kaslefsky v. Kaslefsky46 that if the door of cruelty were opened too wide, the
45 (2006) 4 SCC 558.
46 (1950) 2 All ER 398.
courts would be granting divorce for incompatibility of temperament, but this temptation must be
resisted, lest the institution of marriage is imperilled. At the same time, the bench felt that the
concept of legal cruelty has changed according to the advancement of social concepts and standards
of living. Continuous ill-treatment, cessation of marital intercourse, studied neglect, indifference on
the part of the spouse and allegation of unchastity are all factors that lead to mental or legal cruelty.
While doing so, this Court affirmed that a set of facts stigmatized as cruelty in one case may not be
so in another, as cruelty largely depends on the kind of lifestyle the parties are accustomed to or
their social and economic conditions. Similarly, intention, it was observed, was immaterial as there
can be cruelty even by unintentional conduct. Moreover, mental cruelty is difficult to establish by
direct evidence and is to be deciphered by attending to the facts and circumstances in which the two
partners in matrimony had been living. On the question of irretrievable breakdown of marriage,
which is not a ground for divorce under the Hindu Marriage Act, reference was made to the fault
theory, which is hinged on an accusatorial principle of divorce. Excessive reliance on fault as a
ground for divorce, the judges’ opined, encourages matrimonial offences, increases bitterness and
widens the ongoing rift between the parties. Once serious endeavours for reconciliation have been
made, but it is found that the separation is inevitable and the damage is irreparable, divorce should
not be withheld. An unworkable marriage, which has ceased to be effective, is futile and bound to be
a source of greater misery for the parties. The law of divorce built predominantly on assigning fault
fails to serve broken marriages. Under the fault theory, guilt has to be proven, and therefore, the
courts have to be presented with concrete instances of adverse human behaviour, thereby maligning
the institution of marriage. Public interest demands that the marriage status should, as far as
possible, be maintained, but where the marriage has been wrecked beyond the hope of salvage,
public interest lies in recognising the real fact. No spouse can be compelled to resume life with a
consort, and as such, nothing is gained by keeping the parties tied forever to a marriage which has,
in fact, ceased to exist. In Naveen Kohli (supra), the parties had been living separately for more than
a decade, and civil and criminal proceedings had been initiated. Therefore, the Court held that the
marriage should be dissolved, as wisdom lies in accepting the pragmatic reality of life. The Court
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
20
should take a decision which would ultimately be conducive to the interest of both the parties. The
Court also directed the payment of Rs.25,00,000/- towards permanent maintenance to the wife.
29. In 2018, the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom, in Owens v.
Owens47, had the occasion to analyse and evaluate the fault theory as a ground for divorce, which
requires one spouse to make allegations on the conduct of the other. The judgment notes that the
courts invariably face a daunting task in finding the truth of why the marriage has collapsed.
Apportioning blame is an inherently difficult task, given the fact that the court has to find faults in
the conduct of the spouses, expecting them to have neither heroic virtues nor selfless abnegation. As
subjectivity is involved, the courts find it difficult to evaluate the gravity or otherwise of the conduct
complained of and find the truth. Lord Wilson, with whom Lord Hodge and Lady Black agreed, had
referred to the three-fold test to interpret Section 1(2)(b) of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973 (of
England and Wales) to establish whether the marriage had been irretrievably broken down in such a
way that the petitioner cannot reasonably be expected to live with the respondent; (i) by reference to
the allegations of behaviour in the petition, to determine what the respondent did or did not do; (ii)
to assess the effect which the behaviour had upon 47 (2018) UKSC 41.
the particular petitioner in the light of the latter’s personality and disposition and of all
circumstances in which it occurred; and (iii) to make an evaluation whether as a result of the
respondent’s behaviour and in the light of its effect on the petitioner, an expectation that the
petitioner should continue to live with the respondent would be unreasonable48. Lady Hale, in her
judgment, observed that searching and assigning blame is not vital, as the ground of divorce is based
on conduct, and not fault or fact finding to ascertain the party to be blamed. On the other hand,
cumulative effect of a great number of small incidents indicative of authoritarian, demeaning and
humiliating conduct over a period of time would constitute a good ground for divorce. Such conduct
can destroy the trust and confidence required to sustain a marriage. Further, the effect of the
spouse’s behaviour, rather than the behaviour itself, should make it unreasonable to expect the
other spouse to cohabit; this is the question to be answered.
30. We have referred to the judgment in Owens (supra), which applies the then law in England and
Wales, not as a precedent, but to highlight that even two perfectly gentle and pleasant individuals
having incompatible and clashing personalities can have a miserable and morose married life. In
such cases, fault 48 These tests, with suitable modification, can well be applied in cases under
Section 13(1)(i-a) of the Hindu Marriage Act.
theory in the pure form requiring apportionment of guilt and blame, is a difficult, if not an
impossible task, whereas in practical reality the situation is appalling and unnerving. The marriage
is irretrievably broken down and dead. We would not read the provisions of the Hindu Marriage Act,
their underlying intent, and any fundamental specific issue of public policy, as barring this Court
from dissolving a broken and shattered marriage in exercise of the Constitutional power under
Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India. If at all, the underlying fundamental issues of public
policy, as explained in the judgments of V. Bhagat (supra), Ashok Hurra (supra), and Naveen Kohli
(supra), support the view that it would be in the best interest of all, including the individuals
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
21
involved, to give legality, in the form of formal divorce, to a dead marriage, otherwise the
litigation(s), resultant sufferance, misery and torment shall continue. Therefore, apportioning blame
and greater fault may not be the rule to resolve and adjudicate the dispute in rare and exceptional
matrimonial cases, as the rules of evidence under the Evidence Act are rules of procedure. When the
life-like situation is known indubitably, the essence and objective behind section 13(1)(i-a) of the
Hindu Marriage Act that no spouse should be subjected to mental cruelty and live in misery and
pain is established. These rules of procedure must give way to ‘complete justice’ in a ‘cause or
matter’. Fault theory can be diluted by this Court to do ‘complete justice’ in a particular case,
without breaching the self-imposed restraint applicable when this Court exercises power under
Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India, as elucidated in the judgments referred to above. 49
31. At this juncture, we would refer to two judgments authored by one of the members of this bench
(Sanjay Kishan Kaul, J.) in Munish Kakkar v. Nidhi Kakkar50 and Sivasankaran v. Santhimeenal51.
In Munish Kakkar (supra), the parties had been engaged in multifarious litigations, including
divorce proceedings, for almost two decades. Yet, they opposed divorce by mutual consent. The
respondent - wife was based in Canada, to where she had shifted, and was statedly taking
medication for depression. The appellant - husband complained of loneliness and lack of
co-habitation, causing mental and physical torture. Several attempts to mediate, and efforts made
by counsellors, psychologists, the panchayat and even the courts did not yield results. In these
circumstances, this Court exercised the power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India,
recognising the futility of a completely failed 49 Explanation to Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act,
which reads, “Where a question arises whether there has been reasonable excuse for withdrawal
from the society, the burden of proving reasonable excuse shall be on the person who has withdrawn
from the society”, partially mitigates the rigors to Section 23(1)(a) of the Hindu Marriage Act and,
consequently, the fault theory. 50 (2020) 14 SCC 657.
51 2021 SCC OnLine SC 702.
and broken down marriage. While observing that there was no consent of the respondent - wife for
grant of divorce, the Court felt that there was no willingness on her part either to live with the
appellant - husband. What was left in the marriage were bitter memories and angst, which increased
with the passage of time, as the respondent - wife was reluctant to let the appellant - husband live
his life by getting a decree of divorce. In view of the aforesaid position, this Court exercised the
power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India to do ‘complete justice’ between the parties.
It was also directed that the appellant - husband would continue to pay the specified amount per
month to the respondent
- wife, which amount could be enhanced or reduced by taking recourse to appropriate proceedings.
32. In Sivasankaran (supra), the marriage had taken place in February 2002, and after about a year,
divorce proceedings were initiated and the decree of divorce was passed in 2008 under Section
13(1)(i-a) of the Hindu Marriage Act. The appellant - husband had remarried within six days of the
passing of the decree of divorce. The respondent - wife filed an appeal and the dispute had remained
pending till it reached this Court. Attempts to resolve the dispute through mediation and settlement
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
22
between the parties bore no fruit. The respondent - wife was resistant to accept the decree of
divorce, even though she was aware that the marriage was but only on paper. Observations on the
difficulty faced by women in the form of social acceptance after a decree of divorce, and also the
need to guarantee financial and economic security were elucidated. However, this Court, relying on
the earlier decisions in Munish Kakkar (supra) and R. Srinivas Kumar v. R. Shametha52, observed
that there was no necessity of consent by both the parties for exercise of powers under Article 142(1)
of the Constitution of India to dissolve the marriage on the ground of irretrievable breakdown of
marriage, albeit the interest of the wife is also required to be protected financially so that she may
not have to suffer financially in future and she may not have to depend upon others. Accordingly,
this Court passed a decree of divorce by exercising the jurisdiction under Article 142(1) of the
Constitution of India.
33. Having said so, we wish to clearly state that grant of divorce on the ground of irretrievable
breakdown of marriage by this Court is not a matter of right, but a discretion which is to be
exercised with great care and caution, keeping in mind several factors ensuring that ‘complete
justice’ is done to both parties. It is obvious that this Court should be fully convinced and satisfied
that the marriage is 52 (2019) 9 SCC 409.
totally unworkable, emotionally dead and beyond salvation and, therefore, dissolution of marriage is
the right solution and the only way forward. That the marriage has irretrievably broken down is to
be factually determined and firmly established. For this, several factors are to be considered such as
the period of time the parties had cohabited after marriage; when the parties had last cohabited; the
nature of allegations made by the parties against each other and their family members; the orders
passed in the legal proceedings from time to time, cumulative impact on the personal relationship;
whether, and how many attempts were made to settle the disputes by intervention of the court or
through mediation, and when the last attempt was made, etc. The period of separation should be
sufficiently long, and anything above six years or more will be a relevant factor. But these facts have
to be evaluated keeping in view the economic and social status of the parties, including their
educational qualifications, whether the parties have any children, their age, educational
qualification, and whether the other spouse and children are dependent, in which event how and in
what manner the party seeking divorce intends to take care and provide for the spouse or the
children. Question of custody and welfare of minor children, provision for fair and adequate alimony
for the wife, and economic rights of the children and other pending matters, if any, are relevant
considerations. We would not like to codify the factors so as to curtail exercise of jurisdiction under
Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India, which is situation specific. Some of the factors mentioned
can be taken as illustrative, and worthy of consideration.
34. Towards the end, for the sake of completeness and to avoid confusion and debate on the ratio we
have expounded, we would like to examine a few decisions, in which this Court had refused to
exercise jurisdiction under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India or dispense with the period of
six months for moving the second motion. In Manish Goel (supra), a division bench of this Court
has held that power and jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution of India, though couched
in the widest possible terms and plenary in nature, is discretionary. Thus, extraordinary care and
caution must be exercised, and unless it is shown that exceptional and special circumstances exist to
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
23
demonstrate that substantial and grave injustice has been rendered, this Court should not
review/interfere with the decision appealed against. Article 136 of the Constitution of India should
not be used to short- circuit the legal procedure prescribed. The power under Article 142(1) of the
Constitution of India was summarised to observe that generally, this Court would not pass an order
in contravention or ignorance of a statutory provision, or merely on sympathetic grounds. However,
the bench did not specifically examine the question of whether the period prescribed under Section
13-B of the Hindu Marriage Act is mandatory or directory in nature, and if directory, whether the
same could be dispensed with by the High Court in exercise of its writ/appellate jurisdiction. 53
Further, the two judges’ bench did not exercise extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 142(1) of the
Constitution of India, observing that it was not a case where there was any obstruction to the stream
of justice, or there was injustice to the parties requiring the court to grant equitable relief. The
contingencies to exercise of power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India were not
established.
35. In Hitesh Bhatnagar v. Deepa Bhatnagar54, one of the parties had withdrawn the consent before
the stage of second motion, and therefore, the decree of divorce could not be passed. The bench
relied on the earlier judgment in Sureshta Devi v. Om Prakash55, wherein it has been held that in a
case of divorce by mutual consent, a party may withdraw the consent at any stage 53 See – Manish
Goel (supra), paragraph 23.
54 (2011) 5 SCC 234.
55 (1991) 2 SCC 25.
before the decree of divorce is passed. This ratio has been approved by a three judges’ bench in
Smruti Pahariya v. Sanjay Pahariya56. Consequently, following these judgments, Hitesh Bhatnagar
(supra) opines that a decree of divorce cannot be passed as the second motion, which is a
requirement in law, was never moved by both the parties. It is also observed that non- withdrawal of
consent within 18 months, the period stipulated in sub-section (2) to Section 13-B of the Hindu
Marriage Act, has no bearing as this period of 18 months is specified only to ensure quick disposal of
cases of divorce by mutual consent. Sub-section (2) to Section 13-B of the Hindu Marriage Act does
not specify the time period for withdrawal of consent. Plea to grant divorce on the ground of
irretrievable breakdown by invoking Article 142 of the Constitution of India was not entertained,
albeit observing that this can be granted only in situations where the Court is convinced beyond any
doubt that there is absolutely no chance in the marriage surviving and that it had broken beyond
repair. Nevertheless, the bench deemed it appropriate to state that they have not finally expressed
any opinion on the issue of the power under Article 142 of the Constitution of India vis-à-vis
dissolution of marriage.
56 (2009) 13 SCC 338.
36. In Shyam Sundar Kohli v. Sushma Kohli alias Satya Devi57, the bench had refused to grant
divorce on the ground of irretrievable breakdown of marriage, but also observed that only in
extreme circumstances would this Court dissolve the marriage on this ground.
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
24
37. In Darshan Gupta v. Radhika Gupta58, the ground of cruelty had not been established.
Thereafter, the two judges’ bench, on examination of Section 13(1) of the Hindu Marriage Act,
observed that it is founded on ‘matrimonial offence theory’ or ‘fault theory’, and as a sequitur, the
person who is at fault and commits cruelty cannot raise the accusing finger on the other spouse on
the basis of those very allegations and seek dissolution of marriage thereon. This case was peculiar
as the person seeking divorce, as per the findings, was clearly at fault and to be blamed. The plea of
irretrievable breakdown of marriage was raised and rejected as not postulated in the statutory
provisions. Reliance placed on Gurbux Singh v. Harminder Kaur59, to urge that divorce should be
granted in exercise of power under Article 142 of the Constitution of India, was not accepted as the
bench could not be 57 (2004) 7 SCC 747.
58 (2013) 9 SCC 1.
59 (2010) 14 SCC 301.
persuaded on the ground and facts of the case to justify exercise of the power. The bench observed
that the concept of justice varies depending upon the interest of the party. The Hon’ble judges held
that “it is questionable as to whether the relief sought…on the ground of irretrievable breakdown of
marriage is available…”. Thus, in this case, the judgment did not give any firm opinion and finding
on the questions that we have answered with reference to the jurisdiction and power of this Court
under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India.
38. In Neelam Kumar v. Dayarani60, reference was made to Satish Sitole v. Ganga,61 wherein the
marriage was dissolved in exercise of the power under Article 142 of the Constitution of India on the
ground of its irretrievable breakdown, but the submission was not accepted in Neelam Kumar
(supra) on the reason that there was nothing to indicate that the respondent was, in any way,
responsible for the breakdown of marriage. It was observed that in Vishnu Dutt Sharma v. Manju
Sharma62, this Court has held that irretrievable breakdown of marriage is not a ground for divorce
under the Hindu Marriage Act. However, Vishnu Dutt Sharma 60 (2010) 13 SCC 298.
61 (2008) 7 SCC 734.
62 (2009) 6 SCC 379.
(supra) did not determinatively enunciate on the jurisdiction under Article 142(1) of the
Constitution of India. The judgment in Neelam Kumar (supra) acknowledges that in Satish Sitole
(supra), this Court did exercise jurisdiction under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India to
dissolve the marriage, as it was in the interest of the parties. In the facts of Neelam Kumar (supra),
the bench was not inclined to accede to the request of granting divorce in exercise of the power
conferred by Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India.
39. The judgment in Savitri Pandey v. Prem Chandra Pandey63 refers to an earlier decision of this
Court in Jorden Diengdeh v. S.S. Chopra64, in which the two judges’ bench had suggested a
complete reform of the law of marriage and for a uniform law applicable to all, irrespective of
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
25
religion and caste, as well as the need to introduce irretrievable breakdown of marriage as a ground
for divorce. Jorden Diengdeh (supra) observes that no purpose would be served by continuing a
marriage that has completely and signally broken down, but the legislature has not thought it proper
to provide for the said ground. This Court in Savitri Pandey (supra) held that there could be cases
where on facts, the 63 (2002) 2 SCC 73.
64 (1985) 3 SCC 62.
marriage has become dead on account of contributory acts of commission and omission by the
parties, as in the case of V. Bhagat (supra). At the same time, the bench felt that the sanctity of
marriage cannot be left at the whims of one of the annoying parties.
40. In view of our findings recorded above, we are of the opinion that the decisions of this Court in
Manish Goel (supra), Neelam Kumar (supra), Darshan Gupta (supra), Hitesh Bhatnagar (supra),
Savitri Pandey (supra) and others have to be read down in the context of the power of this Court
given by the Constitution of India to do ‘complete justice’ in exercise of the jurisdiction under Article
142(1) of the Constitution of India. In consonance with our findings on the scope and ambit of the
power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India, in the context of matrimonial disputes
arising out of the Hindu Marriage Act, we hold that the power to do ‘complete justice’ is not fettered
by the doctrine of fault and blame, applicable to petitions for divorce under Section 13(1)(i-a) of the
Hindu Marriage Act. As held above, this Court’s power to dissolve marriage on settlement by
passing a decree of divorce by mutual consent, as well as quash and set aside other proceedings,
including criminal proceedings, remains and can be exercised.
41. Lastly, we must express our opinion on whether a party can directly canvass before this Court the
ground of irretrievable breakdown by filing a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution. In
Poonam v. Sumit Tanwar65, a two judges’ bench of this Court has rightly held that any such attempt
must be spurned and not accepted, as the parties should not be permitted to file a writ petition
under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, or for that matter under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India before the High Court, and seek divorce on the ground of irretrievable breakdown of
marriage. The reason is that the remedy of a person aggrieved by the decision of the competent
judicial forum is to approach the superior tribunal/forum for redressal of his/her grievance. The
parties should not be permitted to circumvent the procedure by resorting to the writ jurisdiction
under Article 32 or 226 of the Constitution of India, as the case may be. Secondly, and more
importantly, relief under Article 32 of the Constitution of India can be sought to enforce the rights
conferred by Part III of the Constitution of India, and on the proof of infringement thereof. Judicial
orders passed by the court in, or in relation to, the proceedings pending before it, are not amenable
to correction 65 (2010) 4 SCC 460.
under Article 32 of the Constitution of India. 66 Therefore, a party cannot file a writ petition under
Article 32 of the Constitution of India and seek relief of dissolution of marriage directly from this
Court. While we accept the said view, we also clarify that reference in Poonam (supra) to Manish
Goel (supra) and the observation that it is questionable whether the period of six months for moving
the second motion can be waived has not been approved by us.
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
26
Conclusion.
42. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we decide this reference by answering the questions framed
in the following manner:
(i) The scope and ambit of power and jurisdiction of this Court under Article 142(1) of the
Constitution of India.
This question as to the power and jurisdiction of this Court under Article 142(1) of the Constitution
of India is answered in terms of paragraphs 8 to 13, inter alia, holding that this Court can depart
from the procedure as well as the substantive laws, as long as the decision is exercised based on
considerations of fundamental general and specific public policy. While deciding whether to exercise
discretion, this Court must consider the 66 See – Sahibzada Saiyed Muhammed Amirabbas Abbasi
& Others v. State Of Madhya Bharat (Now Madhya Pradesh) & Others, AIR 1960 SC 768; Ujjam Bai
v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1962 SC 1621; and Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar and Others v. State of
Maharashtra and Another, AIR 1967 SC 1.
substantive provisions as enacted and not ignore the same, albeit this Court acts as a problem solver
by balancing out equities between the conflicting claims. This power is to be exercised in a ‘cause or
matter’.
(ii) In view of, and depending upon the findings of this bench on the first question, whether this
Court, while hearing a transfer petition, or in any other proceedings, can exercise power under
Article 142(1) of the Constitution, in view of the settlement between the parties, and grant a decree
of divorce by mutual consent dispensing with the period and the procedure prescribed under
Section 13-B of the Hindu Marriage Act, and also quash and dispose of other/connected proceedings
under the Domestic Violence Act, Section 125 of the Cr.P.C., or criminal prosecution primarily under
Section 498-A and other provisions of the I.P.C. If the answer to this question is in the affirmative,
in which cases and under what circumstances should this Court exercise jurisdiction under Article
142 of the Constitution of India is an ancillary issue to be decided.
In view of our findings on the first question, this question has to be answered in the affirmative,
inter alia, holding that this Court, in view of settlement between the parties, has the discretion to
dissolve the marriage by passing a decree of divorce by mutual consent, without being bound by the
procedural requirement to move the second motion. This power should be exercised with care and
caution, keeping in mind the factors stated in Amardeep Singh (supra) and Amit Kumar (supra).
This Court can also, in exercise of power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India, quash and
set aside other proceedings and orders, including criminal proceedings.
(iii) Whether this Court can grant divorce in exercise of power under Article 142(1) of the
Constitution of India when there is complete and irretrievable breakdown of marriage in spite of the
other spouses opposing the prayer?
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
27
This question is also answered in the affirmative, inter alia, holding that this Court, in exercise of
power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India, has the discretion to dissolve the marriage
on the ground of its irretrievable breakdown. This discretionary power is to be exercised to do
‘complete justice’ to the parties, wherein this Court is satisfied that the facts established show that
the marriage has completely failed and there is no possibility that the parties will cohabit together,
and continuation of the formal legal relationship is unjustified. The Court, as a court of equity, is
required to also balance the circumstances and the background in which the party opposing the
dissolution is placed.
43. For the foregoing reasons, Transfer Petition (Civil) No. 1118 of 2014, Transfer Petition
(Criminal) No. 382 of 2014, Transfer Petition (Criminal) No. 468 of 2014, and Transfer Petition
(Civil) Nos. 1481-1482 of 2014 are disposed of, as vide order dated 06.05.2015, a division bench of
this Court has already dissolved the marriage between the parties by invoking Article 142(1) of the
Constitution of India.
44. Transfer Petition (Criminal) Nos. 96 and 339 of 2014 may be listed before the regular bench in
the second week of May, 2023 for appropriate orders and directions.
......................................J.
(SANJAY KISHAN KAUL) ......................................J.
(SANJIV KHANNA) ......................................J.
(ABHAY S. OKA) ......................................J.
(VIKRAM NATH) ......................................J.
(J.K. MAHESHWARI) NEW DELHI;
MAY 01, 2023.
Shilpa Sailesh vs Varun Sreenivasan on 1 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37623680/
28
