Supreme Court of India
State Of Rajasthan & Anr vs M/S Deep Jyoti Company & Anr on 26 February, 2016
Author: R Banumathi
Bench: T.S. Thakur, A.K. Sikri, R. Banumathi
                                                                              REPORTABLE
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1854   OF 2016
              (Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No.33894 of 2011)
STATE OF RAJASTHAN & ANR.                                     ..Appellants
                                   Versus
M/S. DEEP JYOTI COMPANY & ANR.                        …Respondents
                                    WITH
                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.  1855    OF 2016
              (Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No.35897 OF 2013)
                               J U D G M E N T
R. BANUMATHI, J.
Leave granted.
2. These appeals assail the order of Division Bench of the High Court of Rajasthan at Jodhpur
allowing Special Appeal No.369 of 2009 dated 17.01.2011 filed by the respondent thereby quashing
the circular dated 06.10.2008 which provided for deduction of royalty payable to the mining
department from the bills of the contractors who have been given the work contract by the
government department. Relying upon the order in Special Appeal No.369 of 2009, the High Court
dismissed the Special Appeal No.753 of 2012 filed by the State.
3. Necessary facts which led to filing of the appeal arising out of SLP (C) Nos.33894 of 2011 are as
follows:-Respondent-Deep Jyoti Company, a partnership firm registered as ‘A’ class contractor with
various departments of Government of Rajasthan was awarded contract for construction of link
road. On 06.10.2008, the Mines(Group-2) Department, Government of Rajasthan issued a Circular
being No.P13(6)Khan/Group-2/80- Part dated 06.10.2008, concerning collection of royalty from
the contractors involved in construction work using mineral masonry stone, grit, boulder, river
sand, kankar, murrum, ordinary sand (excluding brick earth) in government department,
autonomous bodies, government undertaking. As per circular dated 06.10.2008, before starting the
work, the respondents had to obtain a short term permit (STP) from the concerned Mining Engineer
by paying a requisite short term permit fees and the cost of rawanna book for the minerals which
State Of Rajasthan & Anr vs M/S Deep Jyoti Company & Anr on 26 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5553240/
1
were being used as raw material for the work. Clause (5) of the circular deals with the deduction of
royalty at the rates provided in the circular from the bills of the contractors. Clause (7) of the said
circular provided that if the contractor had purchased the royalty paid mineral from a leaseholder
then he can get refund of the same by submitting due receipts/rawanna issued by the lessee within a
period of thirty days. Clauses (2), (3), (5) and (7) of the said circular dated 06.10.2008, which are
relevant read as under:- “2. Before commencing the work the contractor shall get a permit from the
concerned Mining Engineer/Assistant Mining Engineer office by applying in Scheduled Proforma
and enclosing an affidavit duly notary certified with requisite short term permit fees and the cost of
rawanna book according to the quantity of mineral specified in G-Schedule.
3. Contractor shall produce the certified copy of the above permit to the concerned department
alongwith the first bill, otherwise construction department should not make payment of the bill and
if by any construction department the payment for the first bill or any other bill is made without
getting certified copy of short time permit, the said department shall be liable to deposit the cost of
the mineral.
4. …….
5. The concerned construction department shall deduct the royalty depending on the type of
construction in the following manner from the bills of the contractor and shall pay through cheque
to the concerned Mining Engineer/Assistant Mining Engineer or get adjusted through auditor
general and the details shall be informed within 15 days.
                       1.  Road Construction             1.75%
2.  Building Construction    1.00%
3.  Road Renewal             0.75%
4.  Other works in which     0.  5%
     mineral is used
            6.   …..
7. If any contractor purchases royalty paid mineral from a lease holder and he wants the refund of
royalty, then he has to submit an application to the concerned Mining Engineer/Assistant Mining
Engineer office alongwith rawanas issued by the lease holder, receipts of RCC/ERCC contractors
and copy of bill within 30 days of the completion of the construction work. The refund of those
rawannas which is desired shall be issued on the name of the concerned construction department
contractor. No assessment shall be required if refund application is not make.”
4. Respondent-Deep Jyoti Company filed Writ Petition No.1309 of 2009 before the High Court,
challenging the legality of the said circular dated 06.10.2008 and prayed for restraining the
authorities from implementing the said circular. Learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition,
holding that the condition imposed by the circular dated 06.10.2008 was a reasonable restriction
and in public interest. Aggrieved thereof, the respondent preferred appeal before the Division Bench
of the High Court. By the impugned order, Division Bench quashed the circular dated 06.10.2008
and allowed the appeal holding that the contractor cannot be compelled to obtain short term permit
State Of Rajasthan & Anr vs M/S Deep Jyoti Company & Anr on 26 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5553240/
2
for conducting mining operations and also cannot be asked to pay royalty from the bills payable and
then seek for refund of the same. Relying upon M/s Deep Jyoti Company’s case, the High Court
dismissed Special Appeal No.753 of 2012 by order dated 14.01.2013. These appeals challenge the
correctness of the impugned orders.
5. Learned counsel for the appellants Mr. Shiv Mangal Sharma, Additional Advocate General
submitted that the circular dated 06.10.2008 merely provides the procedure for payment of royalty
by the contractors who have been given the works contract by the department of government and
that the said condition was imposed by the State Government in public interest. It was contended
that the High Court erred in not noticing clause (7) of the circular dated 06.10.2008 which takes
care of the situation that the contractor can get refund of the royalty deducted from his bills by the
department if the contractor satisfies by producing necessary bills showing that he used royalty paid
mineral in execution of the contract.
6. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent Mr. Manish Singhvi contended that the High Court
rightly quashed the circular dated 06.10.2008 as the State cannot compel a work contractor to
obtain short term permit and also to pay royalty in advance and then claim refund of the royalty as
the same is unreasonable and arbitrary.
7. We have carefully considered the rival contentions and perused the impugned orders and material
on record.
8. The circular dated 06.10.2008 came to be issued by the State Government which provides the
procedure for payment of royalty by the contractors who have been given the works contract by
department of government. According to the appellants, the said circular was issued in order to
ensure the payment of royalty and that the royalty paid mineral is used for construction work. As
noticed earlier, clause (2) of the circular provides that before starting the work, the contractor was to
obtain short term permit and rawanna book and contractor was also required to submit an affidavit
to that effect that he had obtained the short term permit for mining the required mineral and
rawanna book. Clause (3) of the said circular provides that if the contractor fails to produce copy of
the short term permit, the works department will withhold the payment of bills. Clause (3) of the
said circular further provided that in case, the government department which allots the work to the
contractor makes the payment of contract bills without obtaining the copy of short term permit and
rawanna book, then the works department shall be liable to deposit the cost of the mineral. Thus in
terms of clauses (2) and (3), it is incumbent upon the works contractor to obtain short term permit
before starting the work.
9. Some of the fundamental aspects, while dealing with the validity of the aforesaid circular dated
06.10.2008, need to be kept in mind. The said circular which mandates the contractors to obtain
short- term permit fess is meant for those contractors who are registered as ‘A’ class contractors
with various departments of Government of Rajasthan. Such registration qualifies them to bid for
and obtain Government contracts, which are construction contracts. The circular dated 06.10.2008
imposing the conditions, thus, is required only for the purpose of undertaking that work which is
awarded by the Government/Government Departments etc. Otherwise, there is no such
State Of Rajasthan & Anr vs M/S Deep Jyoti Company & Anr on 26 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5553240/
3
requirement or obligation on the part of contractors while doing any other private work. It is trite
that for awarding Government work, it can impose and stipulate conditions, eligibility criteria as
well as terms and conditions on which the contract would be executed. If any person wants to bid for
or undertake the work, such persons has to fulfill those conditions. The only limitation is that
conditions so imposed should meet the test of fairness and reasonableness and such conditions
should not be arbitrary or contrary to any law. The question, therefore, is as to whether imposition
of the condition to obtain short-term permit as provided in circular dated 06.10.2008 is reasonable
and not arbitrary.
10. In so far as the contention that in terms of the circular there is compulsion to obtain short term
permit, in our view, as such there is no such compulsion. It is only to ensure that no mineral is
excavated and used without payment of royalty. The purpose of short-term permit is to ensure that
the material and minerals etc. used by the contractor in the construction work are royalty paid. It
only means that such material is purchased by the contractor from the market which is legally
mined and on which due royalty is paid. In other words, the objective is to see that illegally mined
mineral/material is not purchased by the contractor and used in the construction work which is
awarded by the Government. Not only it is a laudable object, such a stipulation is inserted in order
to check illegal mining which unfortunately has assumed serious proportions in the recent past.
Otherwise, the respondents herein do not stand to loose anything inasmuch as the moment evidence
is produced to the effect that royalty was paid on the minerals by the leaseholder which was used in
the construction, the construction contractor like the respondents would be refunded the royalty so
paid by it in terms of circular dated 06.10.2008. In terms of clauses (5) and (7) of the said circular,
the contractor has to pay royalty at the rates specified in the circular depending upon the nature of
work and on production of bills showing payment of royalty, the contractor can get refund of
royalty. There is, thus, no financial burden on the respondents of any nature. The purpose which is
sought to be achieved, viz., non-royalty paid mineral (which would naturally be illegally mined
mineral) is not used in the execution of the Government work and it cannot be treated as
unreasonable or arbitrary. In our view, there is a complete justification for providing such a
provision.
11. The minor minerals removed from the quarries, admittedly are the property of the government
and the same cannot be removed and used without payment of royalty. It is therefore the duty of the
government to ensure that only royalty paid minerals are used in the work and the purpose of
issuing such circular was to avoid pilferage/leakage of revenue because royalty can be very
conveniently evaded by the contractors either by not purchasing the material from the mining
leaseholders or obtaining it from unauthorized excavators. In case, if the contractor purchases the
material from unauthorized person who has not paid royalty, there would be loss to the public
exchequer and the circular was issued to check evasion or loss to the public exchequer. Such
condition cannot be said to be unreasonable and arbitrary and therefore no prejudice could be said
to have been caused to the contractors.
12. Learned counsel for the respondents contended that the royalty can be levied in respect of the
mineral removed or consumed from lease areas at the rates prescribed in Mines and Mineral
(Development and Regulation) Act 1957 and any such levy can only be by a legislation and not by
State Of Rajasthan & Anr vs M/S Deep Jyoti Company & Anr on 26 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5553240/
4
any circular and the impugned circular dated 06.10.2008 which is in the nature of levy of royalty
was rightly quashed by the High Court and the impugned orders warrant no interference. The
clauses stipulating deduction of royalty payable to the mineral department at the rates stipulated in
the circular cannot be said to be a levy. As noticed earlier, the circular stipulates that the royalty is
deducted at the rates prescribed in the circular, on production of bills by the contractor to the
mining department showing that they had purchased the royalty paid mineral from the leaseholder
and thus it only provides the procedure for collection of royalty. The circular only provides the
procedure for payment of royalty for the minerals used by the contractors who have been given the
works contract by the government department. The High Court did not keep in view the object of
the circular and erred in quashing the impugned circular.
13. The impugned orders of the High Court in Special Appeals No.369 of 2009 and 753 of 2012 are
set aside and these appeals are allowed. Consequently the Writ Petitions filed by the respondents
herein stand dismissed. The parties are to bear their respective costs.
..……………………CJI.
(T.S. THAKUR) …..……………………J.
(A.K. SIKRI) …..……………………J.
(R. BANUMATHI) New Delhi;
February 26, 2016
State Of Rajasthan & Anr vs M/S Deep Jyoti Company & Anr on 26 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5553240/
5
