Supreme Court of India
State Of Maharashtra vs Syed Umar Sayed Abbas & Ors on 12 February, 2016
Author: P C Ghose
Bench: Pinaki Chandra Ghose, R.K. Agrawal
                                                                              REPORTABLE
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                  CRIMINAL  APPEAL  NOS. 345-346  OF  2012
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                      APPELLANT(S)
                                  :VERSUS:
SYED UMAR SAYED ABBAS & ORS.           RESPONDENTS
                               J U D G M E N T
Pinaki Chandra Ghose, J.
These appeals, by special leave, have been directed against the judgment and order dated 15.9.2009
passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Criminal Appeal No.1133 of 2003 and
Criminal Appeal No.1156 of 2003, whereby the High Court allowed the criminal appeals filed by the
respondents herein and acquitted them.
The brief facts necessary to dispose of these appeals are that on 12.8.1995, at about 3.00 P.M.,
Rajendra Rajaram Gupta (deceased), who was a social worker belonging to a particular political
party and had a shop in Mahim area of Mumbai, was sitting in Ganesh festival Pandal and was busy
talking with one Rajaram Sarfare (PW6-injured eye-witness), who was the Contractor for decoration
of the Ganesh festival Pandal. As per the prosecution story, when Rajendra Rajaram Gupta and
PW-6 were talking to each other while sitting on chairs in the Pandal, two unknown persons entered
the Pandal from Kapad Bazaar Road, opened fire on Rajendra Rajaram Gupta and pumped many
bullets in his head, chest and various parts of his body at point blank range. Allegedly, the said two
assailants were escorted by three other persons. The firing noise created commotion in the Pandal
and while PW6 tried to run, he was also hit by one bullet and he fell down. The assailants managed
to escape. The deceased Rajendra Rajaram Gupta was taken to Hinduja Hospital immediately,
where he was declared dead on arrival. The FIR came to be immediately lodged at 4:15 P.M. by one
eyewitness Rajesh Tanaji Akre (PW-5), who happened to have seen the incident from the first floor
gallery of his residential building which was abutting to the said Pandal.
After investigation, charges were framed against 13 accused persons (Accused Nos.1 to 13) under
Sections 302, 307, 120B read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to
as “IPC”) and Sections 25, 27, and 29 of the Arms Act, 1959. Accused Nos.2, 5, 6, 8, 10 and 13 had
either died or were absconding during the trial. Hence, the trial proceeded against the remaining
accused i.e. Accused Nos.1, 3, 4, 7, 9, 11 and 12.
The Trial Court by its judgment and order dated 23.07.2003 convicted Accused Nos.1, 3, 4, 9 and 12
for offences punishable under Sections 302 and 307 read with Section 120-B of the IPC. Accused
State Of Maharashtra vs Syed Umar Sayed Abbas & Ors on 12 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39127022/
1
Nos.1, 3, 4 and 12 were also convicted for the offence punishable under Section 27 of the Arms Act,
whereas Accused No.9 was also convicted for the offence punishable under Section 25 of the Arms
Act. Original Accused Nos.7 and 11 were acquitted of all the charges. The High Court vide the
impugned judgment acquitted all the accused of all the charges by overturning the judgment of the
Trial Court.
The State of Maharashtra has filed these appeals against the acquittal of Accused Nos.1, 3, 4, 9 and
12. Learned Additional Government Advocate appearing for the State of Maharashtra has inter alia
reiterated that the judgment of the Trial Court is well reasoned and well considered. The learned
counsel for the respondents have rebutted the submissions of the appellant by relying upon the
judgment of the High Court pressing that it had gone deeper into the case that the prosecution could
not bring home the charges levelled against the accused.
The Trial Court convicted the accused respondents on the basis of the testimonies of five
eye-witnesses - Hemant Parshuram Akre (PW1), Ganesh (PW4), Rajesh Tanaji Akre (PW5),
Rajaram Sarfare (PW6) and Kishor Maniklal Damaniya (PW7), out of which PW6 was the injured
eye-witness. The Trial Court found their depositions to be corroborative of each other and also in
tandem with the testimonies of PW18 and PW21, the Special Executive Magistrates, who conducted
the Test Identification Parade of the accused. The Trial Court held that it was conclusively
established by the Test Identification Parade and eye-witness testimonies that A1 and A12 had fired
on the deceased. The recovery of the weapon along with the ballistic report further strengthens the
conclusion. The Trial Court found that the prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable doubt
and hence the accused were convicted of the offences charged after being found guilty.
However, the High Court pointed out serious lacunae in the above said evidences and hence the
conviction order was set aside and the benefit of doubt was given to the accused. The High Court is
of the view that the Trial Court had placed unwarranted reliance on the Test Identification Parades
in arriving at the guilt of the accused when the same suffered major discrepancies along with the
inconsistencies of the depositions of the eyewitnesses to that of the injured eyewitness’ testimony.
We have perused the documentary and oral evidences on record and gone through the submissions
of both - the appellant State as well as the respondents. We shall now examine each and every
contention in light of the arguments adduced before us in the Court. In our considered view, the
main issue in the case is whether the identity of the accused was properly established with the aid of
the testimonies of the eyewitnesses and whether the Test Identification Parades were conducted
properly. All the other evidences are secondary and need to be examined only if the accused can be
linked to the crime. To decide the same we shall analyse the depositions of the eye-witnesses.
There are five eye-witnesses, including the injured eye-witness. We shall peruse their statements
one by one. PW1 allegedly recognized two persons, who shot at the deceased and the injured PW6,
as A1 and A12, but his evidence suffers few infirmities. He stated that he first heard some shots and
then some noise like bursting of firecrackers and saw the accused firing at PW6 when he was
running towards the Police Chowky nearby. The major inconsistency is with respect to his
deposition regarding the Test Identification Parade. He stated that in the Test Identification Parade
State Of Maharashtra vs Syed Umar Sayed Abbas & Ors on 12 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39127022/
2
held on 30.8.1995, at Arthur Road Prison, he had identified four persons out of 10-12 persons
standing in the row. According to the prosecution, the Test Identification Parade was conducted by
PW21 (Special Executive Officer) on 30.9.1995. Even if it is presumed that the date was stated to be
incorrect by mistake, the fact remains that PW21 deposed that he conducted 2 Test Identification
Parades on that day. In the first Parade, he placed A1 and one more accused who died later and in
the second, he placed A3 and A4 for identification. At no point of time, 4 accused were put together
for identification for PW1 to identify out of the whole group. This contradiction shows that it is not
clear as to whether he rightly identified the accused. Also, he stated that in another parade held after
almost a year, he identified A12. That parade was conducted by PW18 (another Special Executive
Officer). We are aware that A12 was arrested by the first week of September, 1996 and thus the Test
Identification Parade was conducted on 4.10.1996, but it is too large a gap for PW1 to have
remembered his face.
Also, PW1 had stated that he had seen the deceased receiving a bullet injury on his forehead but as
per the post-mortem report, there was no injury on the forehead of the deceased as he had been
attacked from behind. This makes the testimony of PW1 even more vulnerable.
We now proceed to peruse the evidence of PW4 another eye-witness, who was the son of the
deceased and was sitting in his grocery shop at the time of the incident and was making payment to
one Bhatia who was not examined by the prosecution. Even PW4 heard the noise of bursting of
some crackers and then he could see what was happening in the Pandal and he recognized A1 in the
parade conducted by PW21 on 30.9.1995 and A12 in the parade conducted by PW18 on 4.10.1996.
PW5 is the first informant who stated that he witnessed the incident while he was standing in the
first floor gallery of his building which was abutting the Pandal. He also deposed that he had
identified A1 and A12 in the Test Identification Parades conducted by PW21 and PW18, respectively.
But it is not clear whether he could have witnessed the incident from the first floor as the setting up
of the Pandal was completed and the work of putting tarpaulin over the Pandal was done and only
the decoration of the frill was going on. It is also pertinent to note that PW5 deposed before the
Court that he does not remember the physical appearance of both the suspects seen by him on the
date of incident. It is doubtful whether PW5 could have witnessed the incident in the state of
commotion when everyone was running for shelter due to firing.
PW6 is the injured eye-witness who sustained bullet injuries. He deposed that he could not see any
of the accused and while he was talking to the deceased, he received a bullet injury and fell
unconscious. He stated nothing about the fact that he was running to the Police Chowky when he got
injured. To that extent his testimony does not support the case of the prosecution as the other
prosecution witnesses stated that they saw the accused falling down due to the injury while he was
running towards the Police Chowky.
The prosecution adduced the testimony of PW7 as an eye-witness, but PW7 did not identify any of
the accused/ respondents in the Test Identification Parade which can be concluded from the
substantive evidence.
State Of Maharashtra vs Syed Umar Sayed Abbas & Ors on 12 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39127022/
3
The recovery of arms need not be discussed by us in detail as the same has already been discussed
by the High Court to arrive at the conclusion that it is not trustworthy and incriminating against the
respondents.
Learned counsel for the accused/respondents has cited the decision of this Court in Siddanki Ram
Reddy v. State of Andhra Pradesh, [(2010) 7 SCC 697] wherein it was held:
“When an attack is made on the injured/deceased by a mob in a crowded place and the eyewitnesses
had little time to see the accused, the substantive evidence should be sufficiently corroborated by a
test identification parade held soon after the occurrence and any delay in holding the test
identification parade may be held to be fatal to the prosecution case.” It is very clear that in the
present case the incident of firing occurred in the circumstances wherein much time was not
available for the eye- witnesses to clearly see the accused. In such a situation, it was of much more
importance that the Test Identification Parades were to be conducted without any delay. The first
Test Identification Parade was held by PW21 after about 1½ months of the incident. The second
Test Identification Parade was conducted by PW18 after more than a year of the incident. Even if it
is taken into account that A12 was arrested after a year and within one month thereafter the test
Identification Parade was conducted, still it is highly doubtful whether the eye-witnesses could have
remembered the faces of the accused after such a long period. Though the incident took place in
broad daylight, the time for which the eye-witnesses could see the accused was not sufficient for
them to observe the distinguishing features of the accused, especially because there was a
commotion created after the firing and everyone was running to shelter themselves from the firing.
In view of the discussion in the foregoing paragraphs, we are of the considered view that the
testimonies of the witnesses suffer various infirmities and contradictions and the Test Identification
Parade was not conducted properly and was delayed. The High Court is, therefore, correct in giving
the benefit of doubt to the accused as their identity had not been clearly established by the
prosecution.
Thus, in the light of the above discussion, we find no grounds to interfere with the judgment passed
by the High Court. The appeals are, accordingly, dismissed.
                                    …......................................J
                                                           (Pinaki Chandra
                                   Ghose)
                                     ….....................................J
New Delhi;                                            (R.K. Agrawal)
February 12, 2016.
ITEM NO.1A               COURT NO.10               SECTION IIA
(For judgment)
               S U P R E M E  C O U R T  O F  I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
                    Criminal Appeal  No(s).  345-346/2012
State Of Maharashtra vs Syed Umar Sayed Abbas & Ors on 12 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39127022/
4
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                               Appellant(s)
                                VERSUS
SYED UMAR SAYED ABBAS & ORS.                       Respondent(s)
Date : 12/02/2016      These appeals were called on for pronouncement
            of judgment today.
For Appellant(s) Mr. Kunal A. Cheema, Adv.
                       Mr. Nishant Ramakantrao Katneshwarkar, AOR
                       Mr. Yogesh Ahirrao, Adv.
                       Mr. Vilas Giri, Adv.
For Respondent(s)      Mr. Mushtaq Ahmad, AOR
                                            *****
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Pinaki Chandra Ghose pronounced the reportable judgment of the Bench
comprising His Lordship and Hon'ble Mr. Justice R.K. Agrawal.
The appeals are dismissed in terms of the signed reportable judgment.
      (R.NATARAJAN)                                   (MADHU NARULA)
       Court Master                                    Court Master
(Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file)
State Of Maharashtra vs Syed Umar Sayed Abbas & Ors on 12 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39127022/
5
