Supreme Court of India
State Trading Corpn. India Ltd vs New Delhi Municipal Council on 3 February, 2016
Author: .....................J.
Bench: Kurian Joseph, Rohinton Fali Nariman
                                                                  REPORTABLE
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2772 OF 2009
      STATE TRADING CORPN. INDIA LTD.              APPELLANT
                                VERSUS
      NEW DELHI MUNICIPAL COUNCIL                  RESPONDENT
                                    WITH
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.787 OF 2016
                  (Arising out of SLP (C) No.18110 of 2006)
                                    WITH
                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2773 OF 2009
                                    WITH
                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2774 OF 2009
                                    WITH
                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2775 OF 2009
                                    WITH
                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2777 OF 2009
                                       WITH
                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2778 OF 2009
                                       WITH
                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2779 OF 2009
                                       WITH
                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2780 OF 2009
                                       WITH
State Trading Corpn. India Ltd vs New Delhi Municipal Council on 3 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151993301/
1
                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2781 OF 2009
                               J U D G M E N T
KURIAN, J.
1. Leave granted in SLP (C) No. 18110/2006.
2. The basis of assessment of property tax under the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 (in
short the “NDMC Act”) is the subject matter of these appeals. In Chapter VIII of Taxation, Section
60 of the NDMC Act has dealt with the subject. Under Section 60(1)(a), the Municipal Council is
entitled to levy the property tax. Under sub-section (3) the property tax shall be levied, assessed and
collected in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the bye-laws made thereunder. Section 61
of the NDMC Act speaks about the rates of property tax and it is provided that unless otherwise
specified under the Act, the property tax shall not be less than 10% and not more than 30% of the
rateable value of lands and buildings. Section 63 of the NDMC Act deals with the determination of
rateable value of lands and buildings. The provision reads as follows:
“63. Determination of rateable value of lands and buildings assessable to property tax.-(1) The
rateable value of any lands or building assessable to any property taxes shall be the annual rent at
which such land or building might reasonably be expected to let from year to year less a sum equal
to ten per cent of the said annual rent which shall be in lieu of all allowances for costs of repairs and
insurance, and other expenses, if any, necessary to maintain the land or building in a state to
command that rent:
Provided that in respect of any land or building the standard rent of which has been fixed under the
Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 (59 of 1958) the rateable value thereof shall not exceed the annual
amount of the standard rent so fixed.”
3. Though the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants sought to place reliance on the
proviso under section 63(1) of the NDMC Act, we are afraid the contention cannot be appreciated.
The concept of standard rent is no more available under the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958, since the
said provision has been struck down in the case of Raghunandan Saran Ashok Saran (HUF) Vs.
Union of India & Others reported in 95 Delhi Law Times 508 (2002)(DB). Additionally, it is also to
be noted that the standard rent in the case of the appellants has never been fixed under the Delhi
Rent Control Act, 1958.
4. In the cases before us there are two categories of buildings 1)self- occupied and 2) out of the
leased premises a portion which is self occupied and the rest let out on sub-lease under due
permission from the Government of India. In case the premises is sub-let, there is a condition that
the lessee should pay to the Government 25% of the gross rent fetched out of the sub-lease.
State Trading Corpn. India Ltd vs New Delhi Municipal Council on 3 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151993301/
2
5. In the impugned judgments, the High Court has taken the view that since there is already a
payment of rent by the sub-lessee, there need not be any other exercise for assessment of the
reasonable rent. The High Court has based its decision under bye-law 12 of the New Delhi Municipal
Committee Byelaws Relating to the Assessment and Collection of House Tax. For the purpose of
reference, we may extract the provision of bye-law 12:
“12. The annual value of a building or house which is in the owner's own occupation either for
residential purposes or for commercial purposes and the standard rent of which has not so far been
fixed by a competent authority may be calculated under section 8(1)(b) on the basis of rents of
similar accommodation prevalent in the locality and in the event of the Committee being of the
opinion that the same is not feasible, the annual value may be calculated under section 3(1)(c).”
6. However, it is pointed out that the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 has been repealed and as per
Section 416(2) of the NDMC Act what is saved is only the provisions under the bye-laws which are
not otherwise inconsistent with the provisions of the NDMC Act. Since there is a provision and
procedure under Section 63 the NDMC Act for calculating the annual rent, one need not refer at all
to the bye-laws as quoted above since they are apparently inconsistent with the provisions of the
NDMC Act. In short, it is impermissible to refer to the bye-laws framed under the Punjab Act in view
of specific provisions made under the NDMC Act providing for the levy, assessment and collection of
property tax.
7. Therefore, the only basis for fixation of rateable value is the annual rent at which the land or
building might reasonably be expected to be let from year to year, subject to the deductions provided
under the Act.
8. The basis of the impugned judgments which was wholly based on the bye- laws having been thus
knocked down, we have to get back to the provisions under the NDMC Act for the purposes of the
fixation of the rateable value which is based on the rent which can be reasonably fetched by letting
out the premises.
9. Our attention has been invited to a three Judge Bench decision of this Court in Dewan Daulat Rai
Kapoor and Others Vs. New Delhi Municipal Committee and Others reported in (1980) 1 SCC 685
wherein this Court has dealt with in detail as to what is the scope of the expression “reasonably be
expected to let from year to year”. The whole consideration is available in paragraph 2 of the
Judgment which reads as under:
“ 2. It is obvious from this definition that unlike the English Law where the value of occupation by a
tenant is the criterion for fixing annual value of the building for rating purposes, here it is the value
of the property to the owner which is taken as the standard for making assessment of annual value.
The criterion is the rent realisable by the landlord and not the value of the holding in the hands the
tenant. The rent which the landlord might realise if the building were let is made the basis for fixing
the annual value of the building. The word "reasonably" in the definition is very important. What the
landlord might reasonably expect to get from a hypothetical tenant, if the building were let from
year to year, affords the statutory yardstick for determining the annual value. Now, what is
State Trading Corpn. India Ltd vs New Delhi Municipal Council on 3 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151993301/
3
reasonable is a question of fact and it would depend on the facts and circumstances of a given
situation. Ordinarily, as pointed out by Subba Rao, J., speaking on behalf of the Court in
Corporation of Calcutta v. Padma Devi(1); "a bargain between a willing lessor and a willing lessee
uninfluenced by any extraneous circumstances may afford a guiding test of reasonableness. An
inflated or deflated rate of rent based upon fraud, emergency, relationship and such other
considerations may take it out of the bounds of reasonableness". The actual rent payable by a tenant
to the landlord would in normal circumstances afford reliable evidence of what the landlord might
reasonably expect to get from a hypothetical tenant, unless the rent is inflated or depressed by
reason of extraneous considerations such as relationship, expectation of some other benefit etc.
There would ordinarily be in a free market close approximation between the actual rent received by
the landlord and the rent which he might reasonably expect to receive from a hypothetical tenant....”
10. In the second category of cases before us the actual rent payable by a tenant to the landlord is
available for verification by the assessing officer. But the question is whether that rent paid by the
sub-lessee is in normal circumstances and whether it is either inflated or depressed by reason of any
other consideration or relationship. Having regard to the agreement with the Government of India
for payment of 25% of the gross rent fetched from the sub-lessee, we are inclined to hold that the
25% that is being paid to the Government of India by the lessee out of the rent collected from the
sub-lessee is inflated to include the extra 25% since the rent actually available to the lessee is only
75% of the amount actually paid by the sub-lessee to the lessee. Therefore, going by the principle
settled by this Court in the case of Dewan Daulat Rai Kapoor (supra), the rateable value under
section 63 of the NDMC Act, in the case of the appellants coming under the second category has to
be fixed on the basis of 75% of the amount received from the sub-lessee by the appellants. On that
basis, the rateable value of the premises both tenanted and self- occupied will be fixed by the
assessing officer. This is however, subject to the production of proof of payment/adjustment/
appropriation of the 25% by the lessee with the Government of India.
11. As for the first category, where the building is self-occupied and where there is no sub-lease, the
annual rent will have to be fixed as held by this Court in the case of Dewan Daulat Rai Kapoor
(supra) and in the case of India Automobiles Ltd. Vs. Calcutta Municipal Corporation and Another
reported in (2002) 3 SCC 388 on the basis what the landlord might reasonably expect to get from a
hypothetical tenant. Such fixation has to be made only as per the NDMC Act. It is for the assessing
officer to make the fixation in accordance with law. The assessment for the disputed period shall be
completed within three months from today.
11. The impugned judgments are hence set aside. The appeals are allowed as above with no order as
to costs.
.....................J.
[KURIAN JOSEPH] ....................J.
[ROHINTON FALI NARIMAN NEW DELHI;
State Trading Corpn. India Ltd vs New Delhi Municipal Council on 3 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151993301/
4
FEBRUARY 03, 2016
State Trading Corpn. India Ltd vs New Delhi Municipal Council on 3 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151993301/
5
