Supreme Court of India
T. Valsan (D) Through Lrs. And Ors. vs K.Kanagaraj And Ors. Etc.Etc. on 8 May, 2023
Author: Sanjay Kishan Kaul
Bench: Sanjay Kishan Kaul, Ahsanuddin Amanullah
                                                                       REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3466-3468 OF 2023
                                (Arising out of SLP (C) No.20214-20216/2011)
                         T. VALSAN (D) THR. LRs. & ORS.            …APPELLANTS
                                                     Versus
                         K. KANAGARAJ & ORS.                       …RESPONDENTS
                                                JUDGMENT
SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. The Appellants herein joined the service as Junior Engineers in the Electricity Department of the
Government of Puducherry, having already acquired an Engineering Degree prior to the
appointment to the post of Junior Engineer. On the other hand, the private Respondents joined the
service as Junior Engineers with a Diploma and, in the course of service, obtained an Engineering
Degree. Signature Not Verified Digitally signed by Charanjeet Kaur Date: 2023.05.08 17:25:36 IST
Reason:
Factual Background:
3. As per the Government of Pondicherry, Electricity Department, Group B (Technical) Assistant
Engineer (Electrical) Recruitment Rules, 1979 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Rules’) for the post of
Junior Engineer, 50% of the vacancies are to be filled by promotion, and the remaining 50% are to
be filled by direct recruitment. The next avenue of promotion is to the post of Assistant Engineer
(Electrical).
4. Under the said Rules, 80% of the vacancies for the post of Assistant Engineer are to be filled up by
‘promotion’ and 20% by ‘direct recruitment’. The promotion is made among Junior Engineers with
three years of regular service for those with a Degree in electrical engineering and seven years of
regular service for those with only a Diploma in electrical engineering. A subsequent amendment
dated 07.10.1982 was made to Rule 4 read with Paragraph 11 of the Recruitment Rules on the
subject of ‘promotion’. Thereafter, the amended Rules earmarked 50% for those Junior Engineers
T. Valsan (D) Through Lrs. And Ors. vs K.Kanagaraj And Ors. Etc.Etc. on 8 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19169439/
1
who possess Degree in Engineering with regular service of 3 years. The other 50% was earmarked
for those Junior Engineers who possess Diploma with regular service of 7 years.
Promotion to the post of Assistant Engineers Recruitment for Junior Engineers: 1. 20% by Direct
1. 50% by promotion Recruitment with
2. Remaining 50% degree as through direct qualification recruitment 2. 80% by Promotion.
                                           Out of this 80%,
     Desirable qualification                a. 50% for Junior
     for direct recruits:                      Engineer with 3
     Degree in Electrical &                    years regular
     Electronics Engineering                   service in the
                                               grade        and
     Essential                                 possessing an
     Qualification:                            Engineering
     Diploma in Electrical                     Degree and
     and Electronics with                   b. 50% for Junior
     three years’ experience                   Engineer with 7
                                               years regular
                                               service in the
                                               grade        and
                                               possessing     a
                                               Diploma       in
                                               Electrical
                                               Engineering.
5. Significance of the aforesaid is that in order to earn their promotion to the post of Assistant
Engineer, a Junior Engineer, possessing an Engineering Degree, has to have fewer years of service
while in the case of a Diploma holder, the requisite period for service, to be eligible for promotion,
was more. We may notice that while working as a Junior Engineer, there is no difference between a
Degree holder and a Diploma holder. The moot point, thus, which arises, is whether, for a Diploma
holder, who acquires a degree during the course of employment, the period of service as a Junior
Engineer prior to acquiring the degree is to be excluded for computing the eligible period of service
for promotion to the post of an Assistant Engineer.
6. The Puducherry administration construed the Rules to mean that as long as the Diploma holder
acquires a degree, the period spent in service as a Junior Engineer, before the acquisition of an
engineering degree, would be counted. The Appellants, thus, approached the Central Administrative
Tribunal, Madras Bench (hereinafter referred to as ‘the CAT’) in O.A. No. 355/2008, challenging the
decision of the Puducherry administration to promote the Junior Engineers, who were originally
Diploma holders and acquired degree during service, as Assistant Engineers under the Degree
quota, immediately after they acquired their degree without insisting on a three-years of continuous
T. Valsan (D) Through Lrs. And Ors. vs K.Kanagaraj And Ors. Etc.Etc. on 8 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19169439/
2
service from the date of acquisition of the degree. This was alleged to have resulted in denying
promotion to the Junior Engineers, who joined the service as Degree holders.
Procedural History:
Before the Central Administrative Tribunal
7. The CAT, vide an order dated 20.11.2009, partly found in favour of the Appellants and opined that
the qualifying service for Junior Engineers, who obtained their degree during their service for the
purposes of promotion to Assistant Engineer under the Degree quota, would have to be considered
from the date when they obtained the degree. This view of the CAT was based on Shailendra Dania &
Ors. v. S.P. Dubey & Ors.1. The CAT opined that the Rule in question in the present case is almost
identical to the Rule in the aforesaid case and, thus, concluded that the Degree and Diploma holders
are distinct, and both are entitled to promotion in their respective quota. The CAT, in its wisdom,
did not consider the case of D. Stephen Joseph v. Union of India & Ors.2 on the ground that the
issue requires fresh consideration in view of the subsequent judgment of this Court in Shailendra
Dania & Ors.3
8. The aforesaid view resulted in multiple writ petitions4 being filed before the High Court by
several employees of the Puducherry Electricity Department, who were affected by the order but
were not impleaded as a party before the CAT.
(2007) 5 SCC 535 (1997) 4 SCC 753 (supra) W.P. No. 26525 of 2009 and W.P. Nos. 221 & 7165 of
2010 Arguments Before the High Court
9. In the proceedings before the High Court, the two parties relied upon the aforesaid two judgments
– the Appellants on Shailendra Dania & Ors.5 case while the Respondents on D. Stephen Joseph6
case. Shailendra Dania & Ors.7 case is undisputedly a latter judgment and pertains to a different
Rule, albeit it is stated to be almost similar, while D. Stephen Joseph8 case deals with the very same
Rules, in question, as in the present case. The submission of the Respondents was that in the Rules
in question, there is nothing stipulated that the experience gained after the acquisition of the Degree
in Electricity Engineering was alone to be considered.
10. The High Court held in favour of the Respondents by allowing the writ petition while relying on
the judgment in D. Stephen Joseph9 case. In this behalf, the judgment in M.B. Joshi v. Satish
Kumar Pandey10 was also relied upon by the High Court, which had been cited in D. Stephen
Joseph11 case qua the aspect of interpretation of service rules. The said case opined that when a
Rule is quite specific, it would not be proper to count the experience only from the date of
acquisition of the superior educational qualification because such an (supra) (supra) (supra) (supra)
(supra) (1993) Supp. (2) SCC 419 (supra) interpretation will violate the purpose to incentivise the
employee to acquire higher education. The relevant past practice followed by the Department being
to the same effect, the practice of considering the tenure of a Junior Engineer as a whole was said to
have acquired the status of a Rule of the department. Simultaneously, it was also observed that since
the very Rule, in question, had been interpreted by this Court, it was not open for the CAT to have
T. Valsan (D) Through Lrs. And Ors. vs K.Kanagaraj And Ors. Etc.Etc. on 8 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19169439/
3
relied upon the decision qua some other Rules. In the context of the two judgments of the Supreme
Court so discussed, it was observed that Shailendra Dania & Ors.12 case, being the latter judgment
of three-Judges, had distinguished itself from the earlier judgment in D. Stephen Joseph13 case,
being the judgment of two-judges, on the true interpretation of that Rule, in question.
11. The aforesaid resulted in the Special Leave Petition being filed before this Court.
Initial Proceedings Before this Court
12. The two-Judges Bench of this Court, in terms of the order dated 30.01.2018, referred the issue to
be considered by a larger Bench. While making the reference, the two-Judges Bench opined that D.
Stephen Joseph14 case apparently was not reflecting the correct opinion as while construing almost
identical Rules, a larger (supra) (supra) (supra) Bench of three-Judges had opined to the contrary in
Shailendra Dania & Ors.15 case as also in K.K. Dixit & Ors. vs. Rajasthan Housing Board & Anr.16,
wherein this Court had opined that the period of experience must be reckoned from the date of
acquisition of the Degree. This is how the matter came up before the three-Judges Bench, as now
constituted for our consideration in the reference.
The debate before us
13. On behalf of the Appellants, it was sought to be canvassed that the interpretation of the Rule
ought to be governed by the two principles:
i. The prescription of an educational qualification and a certain number of years of
experience in the designated post is a cumulative requirement. A higher educational
qualification makes a qualitative difference in the service rendered by the incumbent.
Therefore, such prescription of a lesser number of years of experience for promotion
has a rational nexus to the object sought to be achieved, namely, achieving efficiency
at work.
ii. Watertight compartments are created for the two classes of employees - the ones with the higher
educational qualification requiring lesser number of years of service, and the ones with lesser
educational qualification requiring higher number of years of service. This demarcation has a direct
nexus with the (supra) (2015) 1 SCC 474 object stated above, and any breach of such demarcation
will amount to treating unequal’s as equals, thereby defeating the purpose of the Rule.
14. It was submitted that the three-Judges Bench in Shailendra Dania & Ors.17 case had taken into
account the aforementioned principles and had interpreted an almost identical Rule. That judgment
had been further followed and relied upon by this Court in K.K. Dixit & Ors.18 case. It was further
submitted that the two- Judges Bench judgment in D. Stephen Joseph19 case had no precedential
value, and it is sub silentio as to the actual text of the Rule and the difference in the quality of service
rendered by a Degree holder Junior Engineer vis-à-vis a Diploma holder Junior Engineer was
neither placed nor covered by this Court. That judgment was stated to be completely based only on
the arguments of a past practice and not as to the actual meaning and interpretation of the relevant
T. Valsan (D) Through Lrs. And Ors. vs K.Kanagaraj And Ors. Etc.Etc. on 8 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19169439/
4
Rule.
15. While referring to the Rule, it was submitted that the plain and dictionary meaning of the word
“with” is “accompanied by”. The synonyms in the dictionary are “accompanied by, escorted by,
alongside, in addition to, as well as”. Thus, the submission of the Appellants was that irrespective of
the use of the word “with” or “and”, it is a conjunctive phrase and in the light of settled principles,
(supra) (supra) (supra) the requirement of educational qualification and service experience is a
cumulative requirement.
16. The Appellants contended that they had qualified as Junior Engineers holding Degrees for a
much longer period of time than the private Respondents, who had entered the service only as
Junior Engineers holding Diplomas and actually earned their promotions almost immediately once
they acquired their Degrees by coming into the Degree quota. This was stated to permit the private
Respondents to infiltrate into the quota meant for the Degree holders based on a wrong
interpretation of the Rule and relying on the earlier judgment of this Court in the case of D. Stephen
Joseph20.
17. On the other hand, it was urged on behalf of the Respondents while commending the view taken
in D. Stephen Joseph’s21 case that the view in that case and Shailendra Dania &Ors.22 case is really
not in variance. The Rule was stated to be different. Apart from that, observations made in
Shailendra Dania & Ors.23 case, which would show that the view taken in D. Stephen Joseph24 case
has not been faulted. A reference was also made to two other judicial pronouncements of this Court
in Anil Kumar Gupta v. Municipal Corporation of Delhi25 and Chandravathi P.K. & Ors. v. C.K. Saji
& (supra) (supra) (supra) (supra) (supra) (2000) 1 SCC 128 Ors.26, which had also endorsed the
view taken in D. Stephen Joseph27case and, thus, that case cannot be said to be a sub silentio. These
two judgments are once again of a three-Judges Bench, and the latter judgment had set down the
principles to be followed as regards the counting of the service period of Diploma holders.
18. The effect of the aforesaid pronouncements was stated to be that in case of the Electricity
Department of the Union Territory of Puducherry, the principle that has emerged in respect of the
Rules is that for the purpose of the eligibility for promotion as Assistant Engineer, Diploma holders
can count their service prior to the acquisition of their degree.
Analysis of the aforesaid judgments and our view:
19. On examining the controversy in the context of the arguments urged and the judicial precedents,
we can say that actually, the issue is no more res integra in view of the judgment of this Court in C.
Chakkaravarthy & Ors. v. M. Satyavathy, IAS & Ors.28 Though it is a two-Judges Bench view, the
very issue has been examined, which is really sought to be debated before us. It was observed in para
10 as under:
(2004) 3 SCC 734 (supra) (2015) 16 SCC 652 “There is, in our opinion, considerable
merit in that submission of the petitioners. There is no gainsaying that this Court has
unequivocally declared that promotion to the post of Assistant Engineers in the
T. Valsan (D) Through Lrs. And Ors. vs K.Kanagaraj And Ors. Etc.Etc. on 8 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19169439/
5
service shall be on the basis of merit and merit alone and that seniority of the
candidates cannot be taken as an input for determining such merit. This Court has
also very clearly rejected the procedure followed by the Government whereby the date
on which the candidate had acquired his degree qualification was taken as a
determining factor. That being so, and given the large number of candidates eligible
for consideration the Government was entitled to adopt the method of restricting the
zone of consideration based on the number of vacancies. Inasmuch as the
Government relied upon the DoPT guidelines for achieving that objective it
committed no fault. The question, however, is whether the Government could
draw-up a list of eligible candidates not by reference to the length of service in the
cadre but by reference to the date on which the candidates acquired the eligibility
which, as noticed earlier, was itself dependent upon the date on which the candidate
acquired the degree qualification. Since, however, the acquisition of a degree
qualification itself was not based on any consistently uniform criterion, test or
procedure, the date on which such a qualification was acquired and resultantly the
date on which the candidate attained their eligibility was also bound to be anything
but uniform and non-
discriminatory. As between the date of acquiring eligibility and the date of entering service as a
Section Officer/Junior Engineer the latter was, in our opinion, a more intelligible, fair and
reasonable yardstick to be applied for drawing-up the list of eligible candidates by the review DPC.
Inasmuch as the review DPC relied upon the date of acquiring eligibility as the basis for preparation
of the list of eligible candidates, it committed a mistake which needs to be corrected.”
20. A reading of the aforesaid paragraph shows that the promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer
was to be based on merit and merit alone. The seniority of candidates could not be taken into
account for determining such merit. In this merit- based selection, there was a qualifying
prescription to be so considered on merits. The time period spent in the service as Junior Engineer
was at variance dependent on whether the person had a qualifying Degree or a qualifying Diploma.
There was no necessity for a Degree to perform the job of a Junior Engineer, and all persons were
alike. The distinction only came into play when the merit-based promotion had to take effect. Thus,
as to when the person obtained the degree as a method of advancement of his knowledge and
entitling him to an earlier consideration in the time period would not be relevant.
21. The Department of Personnel and Training, “Instructions and Guidelines on Seniority”, have
been placed before us. As far as the seniority of promotees is concerned, the relevant portion is as
under:
“2.2. SENIORITY OF PROMOTEES .........
2.2.1 Where promotions to a grade are made from more than one grade and quotas have been laid
down for each feeder grade, the eligible persons shall be arranged in separate lists in the order of
their relative seniority in their respective grades. The officers in each grade, assessed as fit by the
Departmental Promotion Committee shall be interpolated in the ratio prescribed for each grade in
T. Valsan (D) Through Lrs. And Ors. vs K.Kanagaraj And Ors. Etc.Etc. on 8 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19169439/
6
the recruitment rules for the post.”
22. A three Judges Bench of this Court in Chandravathi P.K. & Ors.29 referred to a number of earlier
judgments on the issue, including D. Stephen Joseph30, Satpal Antil v. Union of India31, Anil
Kumar Gupta32, A.K. Raghumani Singh v. Gopal Chandra Nath33 and Pramod K. Pankaj v. State of
Bihar34 and quoted with approval of the last of these judgments. The principle laid down is that in
the absence of any statutory provision or rule made thereunder or under the proviso appended to
Article 309 of the Constitution of India, once an incumbent is appointed to the post according to
rules, their seniority has to be counted from the date of appointment.
23. In Shailendra Dania & Ors.35 case, it was noticed in para 36 that the past practice would be a
relevant aspect while (supra) (supra) (1995) 4 SCC 419 (supra) (2000) 4 SCC 30 (2004) 3 SCC 723
(supra) construing the service rule. The aforementioned judgment distinguished itself from D.
Stephen Joseph36 case on the ground that the interpretation of the rules would be determined on a
case-to-case basis, and the wordings of the rules as well as past practices are important criteria.
Similarly, in the present case, the Electricity Department has a past practice of considering the years
of service prior to the acquisition of the degree.
24. The principle of past practice being of significance has also been noticed in M.B. Joshi37 case.
This judgment also discusses the aspect where there are two channels for promotion (as in the
present case) and illustrates that if the total time period of service was not to be counted, then there
could not be said to be any incentive to acquire the higher degree except as an academic pursuit. The
incentive is that if you acquire a higher degree as compared to a diploma, you come into a channel
which entitles consideration, albeit on merit, in a fast lane with less number of years of service
required in the cadre.
25. In our view, one of the important aspects is the wording of the Rule itself. According to the
Rules, 50 percent of the promotion quota is from Junior Engineers with three years of regular
service in the grade “and” possessing a degree in (supra) (supra) Electrical Engineering. The Rule
does not say from which date the time period of regular service has to be counted, but there is a twin
requirement of three years of regular service as also a degree. As against this, the second scheme of
50 percent promotion from Junior Engineers uses the word “with” seven years of regular service in
the grade and possessing a diploma in Electrical Engineering. Thus, the distinction is between the
diploma holder and the degree holder and the period of service rendered as a Junior Engineer
without any distinction between the years served prior to or after having obtained the degree.
Accepting the plea of the Appellant would amount to insertion into the requirement of the Rules,
which is not stipulated. Further, this is how the Rule has been understood by the Department, the
framers of the Rules, and accordingly, the Rules have been uniformly implemented in the Electricity
Department over a period of time. In view of the above, due weightage must be given to the view of
the framers of the Rules.
Conclusion:
T. Valsan (D) Through Lrs. And Ors. vs K.Kanagaraj And Ors. Etc.Etc. on 8 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19169439/
7
26. In view of the aforesaid, we uphold the view taken by the High Court opining that there is no
distinction between the time period served before or after the acquisition of the degree so long as the
degree is acquired and is the basis for consideration of the promotion. We are, thus, of the view that
for all the aforesaid reasons for the Department in question, the view taken in D. Stephen Joseph38
is held to be applicable law, and we answer the reference accordingly.
27. The appeals are accordingly dismissed.
...................……………………J.
[Sanjay Kishan Kaul] ...................……………………J.
[Abhay S. Oka] ...... .............……………………J.
[Manoj Misra] New Delhi.
May 08, 2023.
(supra)
T. Valsan (D) Through Lrs. And Ors. vs K.Kanagaraj And Ors. Etc.Etc. on 8 May, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19169439/
8
