Supreme Court of India
U P S R T C vs Mamta And Ors on 12 February, 2016
Bench: J. Chelameswar, Abhay Manohar Sapre
                                                                  Reportable
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                        CIVIL APPEAL NO.1425 OF 2016
                    (ARISING OUT OF SLP(C) NO.21125/2015)
      U.P.S.R.T.C.                                       Appellant(s)
                             VERSUS
      Km. Mamta & Ors.                       Respondent(s)
                               J U D G M E N T
Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1)    Leave granted.
2)    This appeal is filed by  the  defendant/appellant-Corporation  against
the judgment/order dated 28.05.2014 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Allahabad
in First Appeal from Order No. 1681 of 2014, which in turn, arises out of an Award dated 18.02.2014
passed by the Motor Accident Claim Tribunal/District Judge (in short ‘the Tribunal’), Hathras, Uttar
Pradesh in MACT No. 131 of 2010.
3) In order to appreciate the short issue involved in this appeal, it is necessary to state a few relevant
facts:
4) The respondents-Claimant(Plaintiffs) filed a Claim Petition under Sections 140 and 166 of the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (in short ‘the M.V. Act’) against the appellant-Corporation before the
Tribunal, Hathras claiming compensation to the tune of Rs.36,35,880/- for the death of one Raj
Kumar Gautam, who died in a vehicular accident. According to the respondents, on 22.09.2010, Raj
Kumar Gautam-the deceased while going on his Motor Cycle bearing No. UP-86F-9224 on
Hathras-Agra road near a place called ‘Ghas Mandi’ was hit by the appellant’s bus bearing
Registration No. UP-14-AB-9038.
5) It was, inter alia, alleged that the offending bus was coming on wrong side with high speed and hit
the motor cycle, which was being driven by the deceased, on the right side of the road. The deceased
U P S R T C vs Mamta And Ors on 12 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115161792/
1
who was aged 49 years sustained extensive injuries and later succumbed to the injuries which gave
rise to the filing of the claim petition by his legal representatives (respondents herein) claiming
compensation for the untimely death of Raj Kumar Gautam. The respondents also pleaded the
details regarding loss of income and other particulars necessary for claiming compensation in the
claim petition.
6) The appellant-Corporation filed written statement and contested the claim petition. One of the
grounds taken in the defence was that of contributory negligence on the part of the deceased also
while driving the motor cycle which resulted in the accident.
7) The Tribunal, by award dated 18.02.2014, partly allowed the claim petition and awarded a total
sum of Rs.24,73,252/- along with interest @ 6% p.a. from date of filing till its realization to the
respondents.
8) Challenging the said Award, the appellant-Corporation filed an appeal before the High Court. By
impugned order dated 28.05.2014, the Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the appeal and
upheld the award of the Tribunal.
9) Against the said order, the appellant-Corporation has filed this appeal by way of special leave.
10) Learned Counsel for the appellant-Corporation while assailing the legality and correctness of the
impugned order contended that the High Court without adverting to all the factual details and
grounds raised in the appeal, disposed of the appeal in a cryptic manner. According to learned
counsel, the High Court neither set out the facts, nor dealt with any issue, nor appreciated the ocular
and documentary evidence in its proper perspective, nor examined the legal principles applicable to
the issues arising in the case and nor rendered its findings on contentious issues decided by the
Tribunal though urged by the appellant in support of the appeal.
11) Learned counsel further contended that it was the duty of the High Court exercising its first
appellate powers under Section 173 of the M.V. Act to have dealt with all the submissions urged by
the appellant- Corporation and after appreciating the entire evidence should have come to its own
conclusion one way or the other keeping in view the legal principles governing the issues. It was
urged that since it was not done by the High Court, a jurisdictional error is committed by the High
Court which renders the impugned judgment legally unsustainable. Lastly, the learned counsel
urged that if his arguments are accepted, the remand of the case to the High Court to decide the
appeal afresh on merits is inevitable.
12) Learned counsel for the respondents, however, supported the impugned order and urged that it
does not call for any interference.
13) Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and on perusal of the record of the case, we find
force in the submission of the learned counsel for the appellant-Corporation.
U P S R T C vs Mamta And Ors on 12 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115161792/
2
14) The powers of the first appellate Court while deciding the first appeal are indeed well defined by
various judicial pronouncements of this Court and are, therefore, no more res integra.
15) As far back in 1969, the learned Judge – V.R. Krishna Iyer, J (as His Lordship then was the judge
of Kerala High Court) while deciding the first appeal under Section 96 of the CPC in Kurian Chacko
vs. Varkey Ouseph, AIR 1969 Kerala 316, reminded the first appellate court of its duty to decide the
first appeal. In his distinctive style of writing with subtle power of expression, the learned judge held
as under:
“1. The plaintiff, unsuccessful in two Courts, has come up here aggrieved by the dismissal of his suit
which was one for declaration of title and recovery of possession. The defendant disputed the
plaintiff's title to the property as also his possession and claimed both in himself. The learned
Munsif, who tried the suit, recorded findings against the plaintiff both on title and possession. But,
in appeal, the learned Subordinate Judge disposed of the whole matter glibly and briefly, in a few
sentences.
2. An appellate court is the final Court of fact ordinarily and therefore a litigant is entitled to a full
and fair and independent consideration of the evidence at the appellate stage. Anything less than
this is unjust to him and I have no doubt that in the present case the learned Subordinate Judge has
fallen far short of what is expected of him as an appellate Court. Although there is furious contest
between the counsel for the appellant and for the respondent, they appear to agree with me in this
observation…..” (Emphasis supplied)
16) This Court also in various cases reiterated the aforesaid principle and laid down the powers of
the appellate Court under Section 96 of the Code while deciding the first appeal.
17) We consider it apposite to refer to some of the decisions.
18) In Santosh Hazari vs. Purushottam Tiwari (Deceased) by L.Rs. (2001) 3 SCC 179, this Court held
(at pages 188-189) as under: “.……..the appellate court has jurisdiction to reverse or affirm the
findings of the trial court. First appeal is a valuable right of the parties and unless restricted by law,
the whole case is therein open for rehearing both on questions of fact and law. The judgment of the
appellate court must, therefore, reflect its conscious application of mind and record findings
supported by reasons, on all the issues arising along with the contentions put forth, and pressed by
the parties for decision of the appellate court……while reversing a finding of fact the appellate court
must come into close quarters with the reasoning assigned by the trial court and then assign its own
reasons for arriving at a different finding. This would satisfy the court hearing a further appeal that
the first appellate court had discharged the duty expected of it…………”
19) The above view was followed by a three-Judge Bench decision of this Court in Madhukar & Ors.
v. Sangram & Ors.,(2001) 4 SCC 756, wherein it was reiterated that sitting as a court of first appeal,
it is the duty of the High Court to deal with all the issues and the evidence led by the parties before
recording its findings.
U P S R T C vs Mamta And Ors on 12 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115161792/
3
20) In H.K.N. Swami v. Irshad Basith,(2005) 10 SCC 243, this Court (at p.
244) stated as under: (SCC para 3) “3. The first appeal has to be decided on facts as well as on law.
In the first appeal parties have the right to be heard both on questions of law as also on facts and the
first appellate court is required to address itself to all issues and decide the case by giving reasons.
Unfortunately, the High Court, in the present case has not recorded any finding either on facts or on
law. Sitting as the first appellate court it was the duty of the High Court to deal with all the issues
and the evidence led by the parties before recording the finding regarding title.”
21) Again in Jagannath v. Arulappa & Anr., (2005) 12 SCC 303, while considering the scope of
Section 96 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, this Court (at pp. 303-04) observed as follows: (SCC
para 2) “2. A court of first appeal can reappreciate the entire evidence and come to a different
conclusion……...”
22) Again in B.V Nagesh & Anr. vs. H.V. Sreenivasa Murthy, (2010) 13 SCC 530, this Court taking
note of all the earlier judgments of this court reiterated the aforementioned principle with these
words: “3. How the regular first appeal is to be disposed of by the appellate court/High Court has
been considered by this Court in various decisions. Order 41 CPC deals with appeals from original
decrees. Among the various rules, Rule 31 mandates that the judgment of the appellate court shall
state:
(a) the points for determination;
(b) the decision thereon;
(c) the reasons for the decision; and
(d) where the decree appealed from is reversed or varied, the relief to which the appellant is entitled.
4. The appellate court has jurisdiction to reverse or affirm the findings of the trial court. The first
appeal is a valuable right of the parties and unless restricted by law, the whole case is therein open
for rehearing both on questions of fact and law. The judgment of the appellate court must, therefore,
reflect its conscious application of mind and record findings supported by reasons, on all the issues
arising along with the contentions put forth, and pressed by the parties for decision of the appellate
court. Sitting as a court of first appeal, it was the duty of the High Court to deal with all the issues
and the evidence led by the parties before recording its findings. The first appeal is a valuable right
and the parties have a right to be heard both on questions of law and on facts and the judgment in
the first appeal must address itself to all the issues of law and fact and decide it by giving reasons in
support of the findings. (Vide Santosh Hazari v. Purushottam Tiwari, (2001) 3 SCC 179 at p. 188,
para 15 and Madhukar v. Sangram, (2001) 4 SCC 756 at p. 758, para 5.)
5. In view of the above salutary principles, on going through the impugned judgment, we feel that
the High Court has failed to discharge the obligation placed on it as a first appellate court. In our
view, the judgment under appeal is cryptic and none of the relevant aspects have even been noticed.
U P S R T C vs Mamta And Ors on 12 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115161792/
4
The appeal has been decided in an unsatisfactory manner. Our careful perusal of the judgment in
the regular first appeal shows that it falls short of considerations which are expected from the court
of first appeal. Accordingly, without going into the merits of the claim of both parties, we set aside
the impugned judgment and decree of the High Court and remand the regular first appeal to the
High Court for its fresh disposal in accordance with law.”
23) The aforementioned cases were relied upon by this Court while reiterating the same principle in
State Bank of India & Anr. vs. Emmsons International Ltd. & Anr., (2011) 12 SCC 174.
24) An appeal under Section 173 of the M.V. Act is essentially in the nature of first appeal alike
Section 96 of the Code and, therefore, the High Court is equally under legal obligation to decide all
issues arising in the case both on facts and law after appreciating the entire evidence. [See National
Insurance Company Ltd. vs. Naresh Kumar & Ors. ((2000) 10 SCC 198 and State of Punjab & Anr.
vs. Navdeep Kuur & Ors. (2004) 13 SCC 680].
25) Coming now to the facts of the case in hand, we consider it appropriate to reproduce the whole
order of the High Court infra: “The only ground urged is that there was contributory negligence also
on the part of the deceased and therefore, the compensation awarded should have been reduced
proportionately. We have perused the site plan and we find that the accident occurred on a crossing.
The site plan clearly indicates that the offending vehicle namely the Bus was on the right side of the
road left no scope for the deceased who was traveling on the left side of the road. Consequently, we
are of the opinion that there was no contributory negligence on the part of the deceased at the time
when the accident occurred. The appeal fails and is dismissed.’
26) Mere perusal of the afore-quoted order of the High Court would show that the High Court
neither set out the facts of the case of the parties, nor dealt with any of the submissions urged, nor
took note of the grounds raised by the appellant and nor made any attempt to appreciate the
evidence in the light of the settled legal principles applicable to the issues arising in the case to find
out as to whether the award of the Tribunal is legally sustainable or not and if so, how, and if not,
why?
27) As observed supra, as a first appellate Court, it was the duty of the High Court to have decided
the appeal keeping in view the powers conferred on it by the statute. The impugned judgment also
does not, in our opinion, satisfy the requirements of Order XX Rule 4 (2) read with Order XLI Rule
31 of the Code which requires that judgment shall contain a concise statement of the case, points for
determination, decisions thereon and the reasons. It is for this reason, we are unable to uphold the
impugned judgment of the High Court.
28) The appeal thus succeeds and is accordingly allowed in part. The impugned judgment is set
aside.
29) As a necessary consequence, the case is remanded to the High Court for deciding the appeal
afresh on merits, keeping in view the principle of law laid down by this Court quoted above.
U P S R T C vs Mamta And Ors on 12 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115161792/
5
30) However, we make it clear that we have not applied our mind to the merits of the issues involved
in the case and hence the High Court would decide the appeal strictly in accordance with law on
merits uninfluenced by our observations. Needless to observe, the High Court will do so after
affording an opportunity of hearing to both the parties. We request the High Court to decide the
appeal preferably within six months. No costs.
.……...................................J.
[J. CHELAMESWAR] ………..................................J.
[ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE] New Delhi, February 12, 2016.
-----------------------
U P S R T C vs Mamta And Ors on 12 February, 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115161792/
6
